             ISA-TR-88.95.01
Using ISA-88 and ISA-95 Together

                 Approved 1 August 2008
ISA-TR-88.95.01, Using ISA-88 and ISA-95 Together
ISBN: 978-1-934394-78-6

Copyright © 2008 by ISA. All rights reserved. Not for resale. Printed in the United States of
America. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise), without the prior written permission of the Publisher.

ISA
67 Alexander Drive
P. O. Box 12277
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 USA
-3-  ISA-TR-88.95.01

                                                     Preface

At the time of publication of this document, the editions of the standards referenced within this
document were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on
this document are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions
of the standards indicated within this document.

This document has been prepared as part of the service of ISA towards a goal of uniformity in
the field of instrumentation. To be of real value, this document should not be static but should be
subject to periodic review. Toward this end, the Society welcomes all comments and criticisms
and asks that they be addressed to the Secretary, Standards and Practices Board; ISA; 67
Alexander Drive; P. O. Box 12277; Research Triangle Park, NC 27709; Telephone (919) 549-
8411; Fax (919) 549-8288; E-mail: standards@isa.org.

The ISA Standards and Practices Department is aware of the growing need for attention to the
metric system of units in general, and the International System of Units (SI) in particular, in the
preparation of instrumentation standards. The Department is further aware of the benefits to USA
users of ISA standards of incorporating suitable references to the SI (and the metric system) in
their business and professional dealings with other countries. Toward this end, this Department
will endeavor to introduce SI-acceptable metric units in all new and revised standards,
recommended practices, and technical reports to the greatest extent possible. Standard for Use
of the International System of Units (SI): The Modern Metric System, published by the American
Society for Testing & Materials as IEEE/ASTM SI 10- 97, and future revisions, will be the
reference guide for definitions, symbols, abbreviations, and conversion factors.

It is the policy of ISA to encourage and welcome the participation of all concerned individuals
and interests in the development of ISA standards, recommended practices, and technical
reports. Participation in the ISA standards-making process by an individual in no way constitutes
endorsement by the employer of that individual, of ISA, or of any of the standards, recommended
practices, and technical reports that ISA develops.

CAUTION -- ISA ADHERES TO THE POLICY OF THE AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS
INSTITUTE WITH REGARD TO PATENTS. IF ISA IS INFORMED OF AN EXISTING PATENT
THAT IS REQUIRED FOR USE OF THE STANDARD OR TECHNICAL REPORT, IT WILL
REQUIRE THE OWNER OF THE PATENT TO EITHER GRANT A ROYALTY-FREE LICENSE
FOR USE OF THE PATENT BY USERS COMPLYING WITH THE STANDARD OR A LICENSE
ON REASONABLE TERMS AND CONDITIONS THAT ARE FREE FROM UNFAIR
DISCRIMINATION.

EVEN IF ISA IS UNAWARE OF ANY PATENT COVERING THIS STANDARD OR TECHNICAL
REPORT, THE USER IS CAUTIONED THAT IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STANDARD OR
TECHNICAL REPORT MAY REQUIRE USE OF TECHNIQUES, PROCESSES, OR MATERIALS
COVERED BY PATENT RIGHTS. ISA TAKES NO POSITION ON THE EXISTENCE OR
VALIDITY OF ANY PATENT RIGHTS THAT MAY BE INVOLVED IN IMPLEMENTING THE
STANDARD OR TECHNICAL REPORT. ISA IS NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR IDENTIFYING ALL
PATENTS THAT MAY REQUIRE A LICENSE BEFORE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
STANDARD OR TECHNICAL REPORT OR FOR INVESTIGATING THE VALIDITY OR SCOPE
OF ANY PATENTS BROUGHT TO ITS ATTENTION. THE USER SHOULD CAREFULLY
INVESTIGATE RELEVANT PATENTS BEFORE USING THE STANDARD OR TECHNICAL
REPORT FOR THE USER'S INTENDED APPLICATION. HOWEVER, ISA ASKS THAT ANYONE
REVIEWING THIS STANDARD OR TECHNICAL REPORT WHO IS AWARE OF ANY PATENTS
THAT MAY IMPACT IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STANDARD OR TECHNICAL REPORT
NOTIFY THE ISA STANDARDS AND PRACTICES DEPARTMENT OF THE PATENT AND ITS
OWNER.
ADDITIONALLY, THE USE OF THIS STANDARD OR TECHNICAL REPORT MAY INVOLVE
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, OPERATIONS OR EQUIPMENT. THE STANDARD OR TECHNICAL
REPORT CANNOT ANTICIPATE ALL POSSIBLE APPLICATIONS OR ADDRESS ALL
POSSIBLE SAFETY ISSUES ASSOCIATED WITH USE IN HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS. THE
USER OF THIS STANDARD OR TECHNICAL REPORT MUST EXERCISE SOUND
PROFESSIONAL JUDGMENT CONCERNING ITS USE AND APPLICABILITY UNDER THE
USER'S PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES. THE USER MUST ALSO CONSIDER THE
APPLICABILITY OF ANY GOVERNMENTAL REGULATORY LIMITATIONS AND
ESTABLISHED SAFETY AND HEALTH PRACTICES BEFORE IMPLEMENTING THIS
STANDARD OR TECHNICAL REPORT. THE USER OF THIS DOCUMENT SHOULD BE
AWARE THAT THIS DOCUMENT MAY BE IMPACTED BY ELECTRONIC SECURITY ISSUES.
THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT YET ADDRESSED THE POTENTIAL ISSUES IN THIS VERSION.

The following people served as active members of the joint working group for the preparation of
this technical report:

Name                  Company
Dennis Brandl         BR&L Consulting
Siem Broersen         GTI Group
David Chappell        CMAa-LLC
Leo Charpentier       Novatech Process Solutions
Lynn Craig *, ***     Manufacturing Automation Associates
Em delaHostria        Rockwell Automation
Yves Dufort           Invensys/Wonderware
Randy Dwiggins        Maverick Technologies
David Emerson         Yokogawa
Alistair Gillanders   DynoChem Inc.
Gavan Hood            Rockwell Automation
Charlotta Johnsson    Lund University
Baha Korkmaz          Invensys
Francis Lovering      Control Draw Ltd
Dawn Marruchella****  Emerson Process Management
Thomas Nash           Schering-Plough
Leif Poulsen          Novo Nordisk Engineering, A/S
Bianca Scholten       Ordina
Keith Unger**         Stone Technologies
Jean Vieille          Control Chain Group
Kathleen Waters       Genentech
Maurice Wilkins       Yokogawa

* Chairman
** Vice-Chairman
*** Chief Editor
**** Secretary
     -5-  ISA-TR-88.95.01

Contents

INTRODUCTION ..............................................................................................................- 9 -

1 Scope ......................................................................................................................- 11 -

2 References ..............................................................................................................- 11 -

3 Narrative Overview...................................................................................................- 11 -

      3.1 Introduction.....................................................................................................- 11 -
      3.2 Main areas of overlap ......................................................................................- 13 -
      3.3 Key gaps in models, definitions and terminology ..............................................- 20 -
      3.4 Summary ........................................................................................................- 22 -
4 Physical/equipment model and information model comparisons .................................- 22 -

      4.1 ISA-88 Physical model and ISA-95 equipment hierarchy model comparison ......- 22 -
      4.2 Categories of information exchanged ...............................................................- 25 -
5 ISA-88 Control Activity Model and the ISA-95 Production Operations Management
      Model ......................................................................................................................- 27 -

      5.1 Mapping activity models ..................................................................................- 27 -
      5.2 Alignment of ISA-88 Process Management and ISA-95 Production

              Resource/Execution Management Activities .....................................................- 29 -
      5.3 Alignment of ISA-88 Recipe Management and ISA-95 Product Definition

              Management Activities ....................................................................................- 39 -
      5.4 Alignment of ISA-88 Planning and Scheduling and ISA-95 Dispatching and

              Detailed Scheduling Activities..........................................................................- 43 -
              5.4.1 Comparison of ISA-88 Planning and Scheduling and ISA-95

                         Dispatching/Detailed Scheduling Activities by Physical Hierarchy and
                         Functional Levels.................................................................................- 46 -
      5.5 Alignment of ISA-88 Production Information Management and ISA-95 Data
              Collection, Analysis and Tracking Activities......................................................- 47 -
Annex A - Relationship of Activities and Terminology Between the Two Standards...........- 49 -

      A.1 How do the ANSI/ISA-88 and ANSI/ISA-95 standards relate? ...........................- 49 -
Annex B - Recommended Changes to ANSI/ISA88.00.01 and Related Documents ...........- 53 -

      B.1 Change ISA-88.01 6.5.2 Manage process cell resources: .................................- 53 -
      B.2 Revise ISA-88 part 1 to include specific categories of resources ......................- 54 -
Annex C - Recommended Changes to ANSI/ISA95.00.03 and Related Documents...........- 55 -
This page left intentionally blank.
-7-  ISA-TR-88.95.01

                                       List of Figures

Figure 1 ­ ISA-88 Control Activity Model .........................................................................- 13 -
Figure 2 ­ ISA-88 Physical Model ...................................................................................- 14 -
Figure 3 -- ISA-95 Equipment hierarchy model ...............................................................- 15 -
Figure 4 -- ISA-95 Functional hierarchy ..........................................................................- 16 -
Figure 5 -- ISA-95 Generic activity model: Manufacturing operations management ..........- 16 -
Figure 6 -- ISA-88 control activities overlaid on ISA-95 activities.....................................- 17 -
Figure 7 --Overlap in physical models of ISA-88 and ISA-95 ...........................................- 18 -
Figure 8 -- ISA-88 Physical Model and ISA-95 Expanded Equipment Hierarchy ...............- 23 -
Figure 9 -- ISA-88 Part 1 Physical Model Overlaid onto ISA-95 Part 3 Expanded
Equipment Hierarchy, showing Work Centers and Work Units from ISA-95.......................- 24 -
Figure 10 -- Overall Physical/Equipment Model for using ISA-95 Part 3 together with ISA-
88 Part 1 applied to all Work Centers and Work Units......................................................- 25 -
Figure 11 -- ISA-95 Categories of information exchanged ...............................................- 26 -
Figure 12 -- ISA-88 Control Activity Model and ISA-95 Production Operations
Management Model ........................................................................................................- 27 -
Figure 13 -- ISA-88 Control Activity Model mapped onto ISA-95 Part 3 Figure 9 ­
Production Operations Management ...............................................................................- 28 -
Figure 14 -- ISA-95 Production Resource/Execution Management and ISA-88 Process
Management Activities....................................................................................................- 29 -
Figure 15 -- ISA-95 Dispatching and Detailed Scheduling Activities ................................- 43 -
                                        List of Tables

Table 1. Comparison of approaches and coverage ..........................................................- 12 -
Table 2 -- Comparison Table: ISA-95 Production Operations Management Activities in
relation to ISA-88. Batch Control Activities ......................................................................- 28 -
Table 3 -- Comparison Table: ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource/Execution Management
in relation to ISA-88 Process Management Activities .......................................................- 30 -
Table 4 -- Comparison Table: ISA-95 Part 3 Product Definition Management activities in
Relation to the ISA-88 Recipe Management Activity ........................................................- 39 -
Table 5 -- Comparison Table: ISA-95 Part 3 Dispatching and Detailed Scheduling in
Relation to ISA-88 Planning and Scheduling Activities.....................................................- 44 -
Table 6 -- Comparison ISA-95 Schedule model versus ISA-88 Procedural elements........- 47 -
Table 7 -- ISA-95 Part 3 Production Data collection, Production Performance Analysis,
Production Tracking in relation to ISA-88 Production Information Management activities ..- 48 -
Table 8 -- Listing Overlapping Terminology ....................................................................- 49 -
-9-  ISA-TR-88.95.01

                                                 Introduction

When the ISA-88 and ISA-95 standards are applied together in an application or project, some of
the terminologies, models and key definitions in these two sets of standards need to be aligned
to assist the users. A harmonization task group with members from the ISA88 and ISA95
committees has generated this technical report to document and map the overlaps, gaps,
similarities and differences in these concepts, terms and definitions. This technical report is
intended to enable an integration team to use these specifications jointly, in an application or
project.

The purpose of the technical report is to
                o Explain how ISA-88 and ISA-95 interrelate.

                o Identify areas of overlap and gaps between ISA-88 and ISA-95

                o Explain to practitioners how to use ISA-88 and ISA-95 together

                o Reduce confusion in industry about the two series standards by answering such
                     questions as:

                            Are they both needed?

                            Do they overlap?
                            Which should be used?

                            When is one more appropriate than the other?

Although the technical report does not take into account the recent proposed additions to both
the ISA-88 and ISA-95 families of standards, the approach used in this harmonization task can
be applied to facilitate the combined use of these two families of standards.

In particular, as the new parts of ISA-88, Part 4, Batch Production Records, and Part 5,
Automated Equipment Control Models and Terminologies, and the additional parts of ISA-95,
Part 4, Common Object Model and Attributes, and Part 5, Business-to-Manufacturing
Transactions, become widely available, there are expected to be other areas of potential
overlaps and gaps when these standards are used together.

However, the planned updates to the existing parts of both these standards families are intended
to reflect some of the recommendations in this technical report in order to minimize the
problematic areas and to facilitate their continued harmonization.

Readers of this technical report are encouraged to help further align these standards by
providing comments to the ISA-88 and ISA-95 committees based on actual experience in
applying these standards.
This page left intentionally blank.
- 11 -  ISA-TR-88.95.01

                        Using ISA-88 and ISA-95 Together

1 Scope

This technical report is targeted for industry stakeholders (individual or teams) intending to use
ANSI/ISA-95 for enterprise-to-control system integration and ANSI/ISA-88 for control system
integration within a common project.

The specific goal is to help such an individual or team understand the key issues involved in
using ISA-88 and ISA-95 together so that they can make appropriate choices. This technical
report is the result of an effort to identify key areas of overlap and gaps between ISA-88 and
ISA-95. It will not discuss issues that are not pertinent to both of the standards.

2 References

The following documents contain provisions that are referenced in this text. At the time of
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All documents are subject to revision, and parties
to agreements based on this technical report are encouraged to investigate the possibility of
applying the most recent editions of the reference documents indicated below.

 ANSI/ISA -95.00.01-2000, Enterprise/Control System Integration Part 1: Models and
     Terminology

 ANSI/ISA -95.00.02-2001, Enterprise/Control System Integration Part 2: Object Model
     Attributes

 ANSI/ISA-95.00.03-2005, Enterprise/Control System Integration Part 3: Activity Models of
     Manufacturing Operations Management

 ISA-88.00.01-1995 Batch Control Part 1: Models and Terminology

 ANSI/ISA-88.00.02-2001 Batch Control Part 2: Data Structures and Guidelines for
     Languages

 ANSI/ISA-88.00.03-2003 Batch Control Part 3: General and Site Recipe Models and
     Representation

 ANSI/ISA-88.00.04-2006 Batch Control Part 4: Batch Production Records

3 Narrative Overview

3.1 Introduction
When the ISA-88 and ISA-95 series of standards are used within the same plant-wide automation
system in an enterprise, it is necessary to align the various definitions in both standards in order
for industry stakeholders to reap the intended benefits. Clearly implementations of these two
series of standards need to work together. If their interaction is not understood, the intended
benefits will not be realized and costly integration problems are likely to arise. The automation,
operations and manufacturing solutions providers and consumers will have to work closely
together in order to minimize and eventually eliminate these integration problems. This technical
report is intended to improve these stakeholders' understanding of both standards series as well
as their intent.

Although both standards are intended to enable manufacturing operations and control, they are
different in coverage and approach. Table 1 provides a high-level comparison.
Table 1. Comparison of approaches and coverage

Orientation                                       ISA-95                             ISA-88
                              Definition of workflow and         Physical work execution for Batch
Conceptual Basis relative to  information exchange for           and other types of manufacturing.
Manufacturing Management      Manufacturing Operations
Functions                     Management.                        Acknowledges but does not
Conceptual Basis relative to  Flexible structure of              directly address manufacturing
Process Control               manufacturing management           management functions.
                              functions that interacts with
Primary areas of concern      business requirements.             Well-defined equipment-oriented
                              Directly addressing most           process control structure and
Affected Industries           traditional process control        function hierarchies extending to
                              activities is presently out of     the bits and pieces of the
                              scope.                             manufacturing equipment itself.
                                                                 Addresses a lower level, directing,
                              Addresses functionalities and      controlling and coordinating the
                              applications at a level below      people and equipment that
                              enterprise business systems but    perform or cause the physical
                              above manufacturing control        transformation of raw or
                              systems.                           intermediate materials into final or
                                                                 intermediate products.
                              Spans all types of manufacturing.  Written primarily in terms of batch
                                                                 manufacturing, but is often
                                                                 applied in other types of
                                                                 manufacturing.

A key task in attempting a combined use of the two standards is to recognize and identify where
their definitions and models overlap and where there exists gaps when dealing with the
information exchanges within the same application. When dealing with the overlaps and gaps,
the user of the two standards has the challenging task of reconciling terminology whenever the
two standards use either different terms to mean the same thing or the same term to mean
different things. These tasks need to be accomplished to realize a successful combined use of
ISA-88 and ISA-95.
                                            - 13 -                     ISA-TR-88.95.01

    Recipe                    Production             Production
Management                   Planning and           Information
                              Scheduling            Management

                                Process
                             Management

Source: ISA88 Part 1 Figure      Unit
19 ­ Control activity model  Supervision

                               Process
                               Control

                             Personnel and  Outside the scope
                             Environmental  of this standard

                               Protection

                             Figure 1 ­ ISA-88 Control Activity Model

3.2 Main areas of overlap

The control activity model in Part 1 of the ISA-88 standard is shown in Figure 1. It shows a
hierarchy of three primary activities (i.e. Process Management, Unit Supervision and Process
Control) that implement control. In addition, there are three other complementary activities (i.e.
Recipe Management, Production Planning and Scheduling and Production Information
Management) that exchange information with the primary activities to realize the effective and
efficient production of the correct products.

In Figure 1, the Process Control activity represents the functionality required to accomplish
traditional state oriented and regulatory control. Because ISA-88 is all about adding procedural
control to more traditional.
                             Enterprise

                                  May contain
                             Site

                                   May contain
                             Area

Source: ISA88 Part 1 Figure          May contain
      2 ­ Physical model     P rocess

                               Cell

                                     Must contain
                               Unit

                             May contain

                             Equ ipm ent
                               M odu le

                                                May contain

                             May contain

                             Control
                             M odu le

                                                May contain

                                             Figure 2 ­ ISA-88 Physical Model

Process Control, the Unit Supervision activity provides most of the functionality required to
execute procedures and to direct the lower level functionality described in the Process Control
activity. Since those procedures often must be performed in multiple units and common
resources at the same time in a precise sequence with exact timing and because there could be
many procedures active at the same time, a great deal of coordination is necessary. The
coordination functions and the remainder of needed procedural control functionality are defined
in the Process Management control activity. By their nature, the interconnection of the three
primary control activities is viewed in ISA-88 as interactive and time sensitive. For that reason,
they are essentially inseparable in any practical implementation where there is significant
interaction of closely linked elements (units and common resources) of the manufacturing
equipment being controlled.

While the control activities represent the functionality needed to implement procedural control, it
is equipment that is, in fact, controlled. Unlike the more traditional view of process control that
treats control as separate, abstract activities that focus primarily on manipulation of final control
elements, procedural control addresses and provides functionality to groupings and assemblages
of equipment.

ISA-88 defines a physical model (see Figure 2) with a hierarchy of four specifically defined
equipment groupings and three higher levels, fairly abstract groupings that are depicted in
dashed lines because they are specified as beyond the scope of the ISA-88 standard.
                                          - 15 -                                                 ISA-TR-88.95.01

The three primary control activities discussed above rather naturally align with levels in the ISA-
88 physical model. The functionality defined in the Process Control activity controls the behavior
of the equipment groupings called Control Modules and, occasionally, Equipment Modules. The
Unit Supervision control activity provides the capability to execute embedded modular procedural
elements (phases) to control the behavior of the equipment. The Process Cell is made up of
Units and common resources, both made up of Equipment Modules and Control Modules.
Control functionality in the Process Cell relies on the Process management control activity to
track and direct the units and common resources, to coordinate their interactions and to keep
complex procedures sorted out and working together to make the desired product.

As a result, the three primary activities are viewed in ISA-88 as tightly bound to the process cell,
as well as the unit and the lower level equipment that make up the process cell. The other three
complementary activities are specifically not part of the Process Cell and their functionalities
transcend individual process cells. In the ISA-88 models, they are not tightly bound to any
specific grouping of equipment and are not clearly related to any particular level in the physical
model. However, these functionalities may be likely associated with equipment groupings in the
Area, Site and Enterprise as shown in the physical model but not likely with the Process Cell.

When the first parts of the ISA-88 standard were issued, there was no recognized standard
defining functions above the Process Cell. As a result, it was necessary to define the three
higher-level control activities in order to make sense of the functions in the lower level control
oriented activities. Process Management cannot function without a recipe and a schedule, both
of which are likely to come from above or outside the Process Cell. The recipe, or the basis for it,
is usually generated in some corporate R&D group. The detailed schedule needed by ISA-88 is
usually generated by production operations management and must transcend all Process Cells
or Work Centers involved in making the product if it is to be effective and promote manufacturing
efficiency. The third higher level activity, "Production Information Management" was defined to
accept, manage, store and distribute information from multiple Process Cells.

                      Level 4 activities        ENTERPRISE                      Source: ISA95 Part 3 Figure 7-
                     typically deal with                                         Typical expanded equipment

                           these objects                                                      hi erarch y

                                                            Legend

                                                SITE                     contains 0 or more

                                                                         contains 1 or more

                                                AREA

 Level 3 activities  PROCESS              PR ODU CTION     PRO DUCTI ON         STORAGE
typically deal with     CELL                    UNIT             LIN E             ZONE

      these objects

                     UNIT                 UNIT              WORK                STORAGE
                                                            C ELL                  U NIT

                     Equipment used       Equipment used    Equipment used      Equipment used
                          in batch          in continuous     in repetitive or   for storage or
                                              production                           m ov eme nt
                        production                         discrete production

                                  Figure 3 -- ISA-95 Equipment hierarchy model

In the ISA-95 standards series, there are two forms of hierarchy ­ a physical equipment
hierarchy and a functional (activity) hierarchy. Figure 3 (from ISA-95 Part 3, Fig. 7) illustrates an
expanded equipment hierarchy, covering more types of manufacturing with less resolution as
compared to Figure 2.
Level 4

        Business Planning & Logistics

                     Plant Production Scheduling,
                    Operational Management, etc

Level 3               Manufacturing                          Interface addressed
                                                             in this Part 1
             Operations & Control                            standard

             Dispatching Production, Detailed Production  Source: ISA95 Part 1 Figure
                  Scheduling, Reliability Assurance, ...    3 ­ Functional hierarchy

Levels
2,1,0

              Batch   Continuous Discrete
             Control
                      Control        Control

                                        Figure 4 -- ISA-95 Functional hierarchy

The ISA-95 activity hierarchy explicitly addresses the various categories of manufacturing
operations management activities within Level 3 of the Purdue Reference Model (PRM) and their
interactions with other levels, as shown in Figure 4 (from ISA-95 Part 1, Figure 3). Each
manufacturing operations management category, such as production operations, maintenance
operations and product quality testing operations can be further detailed in terms of a common
generic set of detailed activities, as shown in Figure 5 (from ISA-95 Part 3, Figure 6).

Operations   Operations    Operations                     Operations
 definition   capability     request                       response

                            Detailed                                       Source: ISA95 Part 3 Figure 6 ­ Generic
                           scheduling                                            activity model of manufacturing
                                                                                      operations management
                Resource
             management                                   Tracking

                           Dispatching                                Analysis

               Definition                                    Data
             management                                   collection

                             Execution
                           management

       Figure 5 -- ISA-95 Generic activity model: Manufacturing operations management

Although the activity names used in ISA-95 are slightly different from terms used in ISA-88, all
three of the ISA-88 complementary activities (i.e. Recipe Management, Production Planning and
Scheduling and Production Information Management) can be mapped to the ISA-95 Level 3
detailed activities as noted in Figure 6, from a perspective where the ISA-88 functional activities
could have some aspects not considered within the ISA-95 definitions.
                                          - 17 -                                                 ISA-TR-88.95.01

 IS A- 95           I SA-95                       IS A- 95                           ISA-95      Legend:
 Prod uct         Produ ction                   Produ cti on                      Pro duction    Dashed rounded
def in iti on     capability                     sc hedul e                      perf orm an ce  rec tangles are IS A-
                                                                                                 88 activities
      IS A- 88                                    IS A- 95                           ISA-95      Solid ovals are ISA-
      Rec ipe                             Detailed production                     Prod uctio n   95 activities
  Manageme nt
                                                schedu li ng                        tr ac king                    ISA-88
(General & Site)                                                                                               Pr odu ctio n
                                                  IS A- 95                                                    In for mat ion
                              I SA-95           Produ cti on                                                 Management
                     Production resource       dispatching
                                                                                                          ISA-95
                          managem ent                                                                  Productio n
                                                                                                      Perf orm an ce
                      ISA-88
                   Prod uct ion                                                                          analysis
                  Planning and
                   Scheduling

                           I SA-95                  IS A-8 8                           ISA-95
                    Product definition    Process Management                     Production data

                       managem ent                 IS A- 95                          c oll ection
         ISA-88                           Production execution
Recipe Management                                                                              Equipment and process
 (Master & Control)                            managem ent                                     specific data

 Equipment and process                    Op erat ional  Op er at io nal                                     ISA-88 Unit
specific production rules                  commands      responses                                           S up ervisi on
                                                                                                             ISA-88 Process
                                          ISA-95 Production level 1-2 functions
                                                                                                                   Control

      Source: ISA95 Part 3 Figure 9 ­ Activity model of production operations management ­ objects spread out and
     relabeled, ISA88 Part 1 Figure 19 ­ Control activity model resized and rearranged to map onto the ISA95 figure

                    Figure 6 -- ISA-88 control activities overlaid on ISA-95 activities

A similar mapping can be envisioned where the ISA-95 activities and functions may have specific
aspects not included within the ISA-88 activities and functions. The more general coverage of
ISA-95 is particularly evident compared to the three higher level ISA-88 control activities
(Production Information Management, Production Planning and Scheduling, and Recipe
Management) or when other ISA-95 operational categories besides Production (e.g. maintenance
and quality assurance testing) are considered.

The three higher level ISA-88 control activities fit nicely within the ISA-95 structure. However,
the three primary control activities align more loosely.

     · ISA-88 Production Information Management activity can be considered a placeholder for
          ISA-95 activities including Data Collection, Tracking and Analysis.

     · ISA-88 Production Planning and Scheduling activity can be considered a placeholder for
          the subset of ISA-95 activities including Detailed Scheduling, Dispatching and Resource
          Management.

     · ISA-88 Recipe Management activity, on the other hand can be considered to be a
          specialized and, in some cases more detailed, subset of the much more generally defined
          ISA-95 Product Definition Management activity.

     · ISA-95 defines a function called Production Execution Management that almost exactly
          corresponds to the ISA-88 control activity called Process Management. That is a clear
          overlap with a primary ISA-88 control activity and, unlike the higher level control activities,
          has the potential for significant confusion stemming from the interaction of the functions
          in the activity models with the physical equipment depicted in the related physical models.
     · ISA-95 acknowledges the physical unit but specifically excludes definition of Unit
          Supervision or any physical equipment or functionality below the unit level so there is no
          overlap at all with those functions.

Both standards have physical models (see Figure 2 and Figure 3) that appear similar, differing
only in number of types of manufacturing operations and control represented and the level of
detail with which the models are defined.

Some of the types of physical equipment that correspond to the Work Center definition in the
ISA-95 physical model are clearly equivalent or similar to the Process Cell in the ISA-88 physical
model. Figure 7 shows examples of ISA-95 Work Centers, such as, a Production Unit in
continuous production, a Production Line in discrete production or Storage Zone that are
equivalent to an ISA-88 Process Cell definition.

In the ISA-88 standard, the Process Cell (or work center) is viewed as a module of equipment
made up of smaller, more focused modules of equipment called Units and common resources,
both of which are, in turn, made up of lower level equipment groupings such as Equipment
Modules and Control Modules that do not appear in the ISA-95 model.

                           ENT E RPRIS E          Legend
                                 SITE                    contains 0 or m ore

ISA95                                                        contains 1 or more
Scope
                                  A REA

         P RO CES S        P RO DUCT IO N  PRODUC TION       ST O RA GE          ISA-95
             CEL L                UNIT            LIN E         ZONE              Work
                                                                                 Center
              UNIT         UNI T           WORK              ST O RA GE
                                            CELL                UNIT             ISA-9 5
        EQ UIP ME NT                                                              Work
ISA8 8    M ODULE                                                                 Unit
Scop e
         CONTROL
          M ODULE          Equipm ent used Equipment used    Equipment used
                                                              for storage or
                           in continuous   in repetitive or     m ovement

                           production discrete production

                           Source: ISA95 Part 3 Figure 7 ­ Typical expanded equipm ent hierarchy ­ equipm ent
                           and control modules added, brackets and annotations changed and som e added

        Equipment used in
         batch production

                        Figure 7 --Overlap in physical models of ISA-88 and ISA-95

The overlap between the physical models in ISA-88 and ISA-95 is shown in Figure 7. The scope
of each standard series is indicated by the vertical curly brackets in Figure 7. Each of the
defined entities in the ISA-88 Physical Model is regarded, not just as groupings of equipment, but
also as equipment entities, each a grouping of equipment with embedded control functionality
that, in practice, is not separable. This is also true for common resources. Since common
resources can be either Control Modules or Equipment Modules, common resources were not
defined separately in the ISA-88 standard and no attempt was made to include them in the ISA-
88 physical model as clearly defined entities. However, they are necessary and can't be ignored.
Viewed as equipment alone, the ISA-88 Process Cell and the ISA-95 Work Center can be
considered to be comparable, as can the ISA-88 Unit and the ISA-95 Work Unit. However, the
- 19 -  ISA-TR-88.95.01

ISA-95 model definitions of workflow-related segments (i.e. process segment, product segment,
production segment) and resources (i.e. equipment, personnel, material) do not readily allow for
a detailed and straightforward correspondence with the ISA-88 model definitions of equipment
entities, procedural control and processes, especially, in the regions of overlap.

Since ISA-95 focuses more on the information exchanges within and above Level 3 of the ISA-95
functional hierarchy, detailed definitions of a Work Center, Work Unit or any lower level
groupings of equipment has not been provided. In spite of the differences in precision, the
definition comparisons are adequate and should not be a problem. The big difference is that
ISA-95 primarily addresses control and similar functionality from an information exchange point
of view and does not consider the binding of equipment to the control functionality. This
becomes an issue in the understanding of the Work Center or Process Cell.

For Batch Process Manufacturing and other manufacturing processes based on ISA-88 principles,
the ISA-88 Process Management control activity and the ISA-95 Production Execution
Management function are essentially identical in definition. However, they differ greatly in
perspective. From an ISA-88 perspective, Process Management is an inextricable part of an
equipment entity called a Process Cell. That equipment entity is made up of both the control
activity called Process Management and the physical equipment contained within the Process
Cell that it controls. From an ISA-95 perspective, Production Execution Management is purely
an information function that is neither bound to nor bounded by specific equipment. Noting this
fundamental difference is essential in the combined use of ISA-88 and ISA-95.

For practical purposes, it is recognized that the ISA-95 Production Execution Management
function might well need to be implemented from an ISA-88 perspective. There is a need to
identify an interface above the ISA-95 Production Execution Management function in the data
models that would be the focus in a future part of the ISA-95 standard. That interface will allow a
"clean" interface if most or all of the Production Execution Management function is implemented
on separate platforms such as process control systems or other ISA-88 oriented automated
systems that treat the Process Cell or Work Center as an equipment entity requiring very tight
coupling between Process Management and Unit Supervision (or whatever the equivalent
function(s) end up being called in a given implementation).

Depending on the choices of implementation, the virtual boundaries between the ISA-95
functional and physical levels may or may not be exposed; furthermore, the actual boundaries
implemented may not correspond to the boundary between Level 3 and Level 2, as defined in the
ISA-95 standard. A key focus of the ISA-95 standard is to model information flow among
functional entities while the ISA-88 standard focuses on modeling the flow of control among
equipment entities. Problems tend to arise in the way these entities are implemented. ISA-88 is
much closer to being a physical implementation model than ISA-95. By treating the ISA-95
models as abstractions of physical implementation models and by recognizing the ISA-88
implementation models of equipment entities, one can realize the combined use of these two
standards.

To avoid problems due to overlaps, terms need to be rationalized, operational correspondence
clarified and implementation examples given. Fortunately the functional boundaries in the two
standards appear to be quite similar and the included functionality appears to be nearly the same.
It is only when function is combined with and bound to equipment that confusion is likely. The
ISA-88 equipment entity concept and ISA-95 segment concepts need to be recognized and
understood to improve clarity where the two standards must interact. In particular, extending the
much more broadly defined ISA-95 segment concepts from Level 4 to Level 3 (as is commonly
done in practice, but not currently defined in the standard) provides a layer that resolves into the
ISA-88 recipe entities that affect its equipment entities.

Both standards, in practice, are not only used for automation purposes, but are also useful to
clarify and promote communication about manufacturing concepts, systems and technologies
between people and groups. This often leads to the need to choose between terminology and
models.

3.3 Key gaps in models, definitions and terminology

In addition to overlaps in the terms, definitions and models, there are gaps between the two
standards that also need to be recognized and understood. There are terms, definitions and
model elements in ISA-88 that are not included in ISA-95, as well as, vice-versa. Some of these
"gaps" are mentioned in the detailed tables in Clause 4.

A significant gap in the two standards is in the types of production operations being addressed.
ISA-95 is designed to apply to several types of production, including batch production, while ISA-
88 was originally intended for batch manufacturing alone; however, ISA-88 can potentially be
extended beyond batch to other types of manufacturing as described below.
ISA-88 was written in terms of batch manufacturing, even though there was no intention to limit it
to batch alone if there are worthwhile applications elsewhere. The reason for the batch focus is
obvious. ISA-88 was written because there was no standard way to address automated
procedural control in process manufacturing. This was particularly evident in the case of batch
manufacturing and that was the problem the standard addressed. Though focused on batch, the
standard actually defines an effective and internally consistent way to apply procedural control to
many types of manufacturing processes. It is certainly not the only way to apply procedural
control, but it has been successfully applied in many cases to many diverse types of
manufacturing. In spite of this, the terminology and details remain a problem. Because it is
couched in very batch oriented terms, if one reads the words literally and without interpretation, it
can be easily dismissed as a niche standard applying only to batch manufacturing. Increasing
use of ISA-88 in other types of manufacturing, though, has demonstrated that it may be a
desirable guide in other kinds of applications and may be the desired approach to automation
whether the application is batch or not.

The use of ISA-88 in a broader array of manufacturing technologies is beyond the scope of this
technical report. However, to minimize confusion, it is worthwhile to recognize that it may be
used in those applications and to understand why and a little bit of how it might show up.
Practice has demonstrated that understanding the potential use of ISA-88 approaches in some
continuous and discrete applications of projects is needed because few manufacturing processes
are 100% pure batch, pure continuous, pure discrete or pure anything. Even within batch
manufacturing, for example, the product (the batch) is quite often not a directly saleable product
until is packaged or subjected to further processing. Auxiliary manufacturing processes are
needed, often as part of the same overall manufacturing facility. There are advantages to using
the same general approaches to automation of closely related equipment as long as they are
applicable. It is not difficult to visualize possible approaches utilizing ISA-88 principles in some
continuous, discrete and/or storage situations.

Continuous processes are a good example. They differ from batch processes in several ways.
They tend to have more processing equipment, be more costly and generally do not make very
many different products. They are highly productive in terms of pounds of product per labor-hour.
The regulatory control is often very sophisticated and expensive because even a tiny
improvement in throughput or yield can, over days or weeks or years, result in large benefits. In
many continuous processes the procedures for startup, shutdown and grade change are manual.

However, if continuous processes are examined only in the context of procedural control, most
continuous processes can be thought of as batch processes with a long, unchanging in-process
step. It is true that to apply ISA-88 to most continuous processes requires that we interpret the
intent of the standard's batch specific "rules", but this is often worth the effort. Certainly, startup
and shutdown under automatic procedural control is useful in many "continuous" applications.
Since these are the times of greatest uncertainty, with the greatest need for extensive and
immediate exception handling, procedural control automation may be desirable or necessary. It
- 21 -  ISA-TR-88.95.01

would appear that expanding the ISA-88 standard to encompass both batch and continuous
would not be difficult except for the tedious business of determining what to call things when they
have multiple names. If an expanded and broadly accepted view becomes common, ISA-88
principles will become even more prevalent in continuous (and other) manufacturing processes.

Discrete processes are more of a challenge, not because the principles are different but because
the implementations are so diverse. ISA-88 is being applied to some discrete manufacturing
processes including such examples as packaging lines made up of multiple automatic packaging
machines. Generally, control modules and equipment modules may be buried in the proprietary
machines, but units are not hard to identify and the entity that controls a procedure to convert a
defined quantity of raw material (perhaps potato chips) into a finished or semi-finished product
(perhaps bags of chips) is not hard to find.

These examples are not an argument to force fit a batch standard to replace either existing
systems that work or other approaches that are better. The point is that ISA-88 can be used with
some benefit if it is generalized to make clear how it fits the different environments and, for that
reason, may be encountered in many different kinds of applications. Though not yet published,
Part 5 of ISA 88 is attempting to address some of these very issues. Neither continuous nor
discrete processes exist in a vacuum and are frequently intermixed with each other and with
batch. While ISA-88 (or a derivative of it) is unlikely to become a universal standard for
manufacturing, having a more or less standard approach to procedural control in all of the
manufacturing entities in the same facility could be, in many cases, beneficial and something an
individual or team applying ISA-95 may well encounter outside of "pure" batch applications or
projects.

Some of these issues have already been considered. The ISA-95 committee has elected to
generalize the names of the various entities that are roughly equivalent to the ISA-88 Process
Cell and the ISA-88 Unit. ISA-88 Process Cells and their equivalents in other types of
manufacturing and storage/retrieval applications are all called ISA-95 Work Centers. Likewise
the term ISA-95 Work Unit has been defined as the general term that refers to the unit in a batch
process and similar structures in all types of manufacturing. This is a powerful concept. Since
the Work Units are likely to be specific to the type of manufacturing and/or storage, it should be
possible to have a continuous oriented work unit as part of a batch process cell (or work center).
This solves many problems not addressed by ISA-88. In reality, batch work units are frequently
part of predominately continuous work centers. Things that look like storage oriented work units
are not strangers in any work center.

From a very general standpoint, the mappings and overlaps noted in Figure 7 are similar to those
depicted in Figure 6. In those cases where an ISA-95-based application involves a mix of batch,
discrete and continuous production control, the nature of the overlaps in Figure 7 can be
different from those noted in Figure 6.

Another significant difference in the two standards involves other categories of manufacturing
operations management that ISA-95 explicitly addresses in addition to production operations,
such as, maintenance operations, quality assurance testing operations, and inventory movement
operations.

The ISA-95 generic activity model shown in Figure 5 can be replicated for each of the
manufacturing operations management categories. Additional diagrams similar to Figure 6 can
be constructed but with the term "Production" replaced with either "Maintenance", "Quality
Assurance Testing" or "Inventory Movement/Storage/Retrieval." The ISA-88 models relate
directly to the ISA-95 Production Model, however ISA-88 models may also relate to such
activities as ISA-95 Inventory Movement/Storage/Retrieval and Quality Assurance Testing
models in that ISA-88 recipe and equipment models may be used for automation and manual
control of such activities.
Another gap in the models is in the range of type of equipment resources that need to be
handled by the ISA-95 Production resource management and ISA-95 Production execution
management functions. Although several ISA-88 Process Cells and ISA-88 units could be
envisioned to be handled by an ISA-88 Process Management function, it is necessary to allow
other forms of ISA-95 Work Centers and ISA-95 Work Units when applying these standards to
compound forms of manufacturing operations in a mix of batch, discrete and continuous
production applications.

3.4 Summary

Overlaps and gaps need to be recognized and understood. Many potential conflicts in the
overlaps in terminology and functional descriptions are resolved in this document, but others may
be encountered and must be dealt with.

Gaps need to be filled and will be filled one way or another. It is important to recognize and
understand that the gaps having to do with the physical handling or converting of material, in
particular at Level 2 and below, may be filled by ISA-88 extensions or ISA-88-like models. The
definition of other ISA-88-like models to address these gaps is beyond the scope of this technical
report, but work on that front is underway as this is written and it is important to recognize and
understand it and its special considerations when and where it is encountered. Gaps involving
information exchanges, in particular within Level 3 and between Level 3 and Level 2 may be
filled by ISA-95 extensions or ISA-95 like models. Similarly, efforts are underway to investigate
these extensions.

Following this narrative overview are much more technically focused discussions dealing with the
following issues:

     · Comparison and generalization of Physical Models in the two standards

     · Categories of information exchanged

     · The ISA-88 Control Activity Model and the ISA-95 Production Operations Management
          Model and the way they map to each other

     · ISA-88 Process Management and ISA-95 Production Execution Management Activities ­
          the similarities and the differences

     · ISA-88 Recipe Management and ISA-95 Product Definition Management Activities ­ the
          mapping and the interactions

     · ISA-88 Planning and Scheduling and ISA-95 Dispatching/Detailed Scheduling Activities ­
          the interdependences and the more specific requirements of ISA-88

     · ISA-88 Production Information Management and ISA-95 Data Collection, Analysis and
          Tracking Activities

4 Physical/equipment model and information model comparisons

4.1 ISA-88 Physical model and ISA-95 equipment hierarchy model comparison

A physical model is a tool to organize the various types of physical resources in an enterprise
and to represent their roles and relationships. It is a way to describe equipment resources
available for a process or product.

ISA-88 defines a "Physical Model" while ISA-95 defines an "Equipment Hierarchy," both of which
are illustrated for comparison in Figure 8. (Note: The ISA-95 Part 1 equipment hierarchy was
expanded in Part 3 to include storage zones, storage units, and [continuous] units.)
                                                           - 23 -                                                     ISA-TR-88.95.01

The ISA-95 equipment hierarchy was derived from the ISA-88 physical model, so the ISA-88
model maps well to the ISA-95 model. Viewed as equipment alone, their differences lie in the
depth and breadth of what each standard was developed to address. ISA-88 provides additional
detail below the unit level that is too granular to consider in ISA-95, while ISA-95 replicates the
process cell and unit concepts for other types of manufacturing besides batch. ISA-88 also
defines an "Equipment Entity Model," which maps exactly to the Physical Model at and below the
process cell level and is often referred to as the Physical Model but, unlike the ISA-95 Equipment
Hierarchy and the true ISA-88 Physical Model, it includes all associated equipment control
capabilities.

Figure 8 also shows the ISA-95 functional levels in relation to the Equipment Hierarchy. ISA-95
was developed in some alignment with the Purdue Reference Model (PRM) and part of ISO
15704 referencing the Purdue Enterprise Reference Architecture, which describes organizational
levels; therefore the ISA-95 functional hierarchy is drawn using levels. ISA-88 was developed
independently from PRM and does not use such levels. Mapping ISA-88 to ISA-95 functional
levels can be difficult since no direct mapping between them based on functional level has been
developed in the current standards.

In ISA-95, levels only refer to functional levels with activities mapped to them. These functional
levels do not have rigid mappings to the equipment hierarchy, so the depiction in ISA-95 part 3
Figure 7 shows only how the functional levels "typically" map to the equipment hierarchy. Note
that a similar figure in ISA-95 part 1 shows different "typical" mappings of level 3 and 4 activities
onto the equipment hierarchy, with the cross over point located between site and area, rather
than in the middle of the site level. These are both typical mappings of activities to the
equipment hierarchy because there is no single rigid mapping defined in the standard.

                                                                                                        E nterprise

                      Level 4 activities        ENTERPRISE  Legend                                              May contain
                     typically deal with              SITE           contains 0 or more                   S ite
                                                     AREA           contains 1 or more
                           these objects                                                                        May contain
                                                                                                         Area
 Level 3 activities  PROCESS              PR ODU CTION     PRODUCTI ON          STORAGE
typically deal with     CELL                    UNIT             LIN E             ZONE                         May contain
                                                                                                        Proc ess
      these objects     UNIT                                                    STORAGE
                                                                                   U NIT                  Cell
                                          UNIT              WORK
                                                            C ELL                                               Must contain
                                                                                                          Unit

                                                                                                        May contain

                     Equipment used in    Equipment used    Equipment used      Equipment used          E qui pmen t
                      batch production      in continuous     in repetitive or   for storage or           Module
                                              production                           m ov eme nt
                                                           discrete production                                        May contain

Source: ISA95 Part 3 Figure 7 ­ Typical expanded equipment hierarchy ­ no changes to original 95 model  May contain
            ISA88 Part 1 Figure 2 ­ Physical model ­ no changes to original 88 model
                                                                                                        Control
                                                                                                        Module

                                                                                                                      May contain

                                                                                                                                A

Figure 8 -- ISA-88 Physical Model and ISA-95 Expanded Equipment Hierarchy
                       ISA95 Level 4 activities    ENTERPRISE             Legend
                              typically deal with        SITE                   contains 0 or more
                                    these objects

      ISA95 Level 3                                                                 contains 1 or more
activities related to
                                                         AREA
  batch production
 typically deal with                                                                                      WORK
                                                                                                        CE NTER S
       these objects

                       P ROC ESS                   P ROD UCTION   PRODUCTION        STORAGE
                          CELL                           UNIT           LINE           ZONE

       Batch process   U NIT                       UNIT           W OR K            STORAGE             WORK
 activities based on                                              C ELL                 UNIT            UN ITS
ISA88 typically deal
 with these objects    EQUIP MEN T
                         MODU LE
                                                   Equipment used Equipment used    Equipment used
                        CONTROL                                                      for storage or
                         MODU LE                   in continuous  in repetitive or     m ovem ent

                                                   production discrete production

                                                   Source: ISA95 Part 3 Figure 8 ­ Work centers and work units ­ added equipment and
                                                   control modules, bolded some objects, added brackets and annotations on left side

                       Equipment used in
                        batch production

Figure 9 -- ISA-88 Part 1 Physical Model Overlaid onto ISA-95 Part 3 Expanded Equipment
                     Hierarchy, showing Work Centers and Work Units from ISA-95

The ISA-88 standard does not use the concept of functional levels. The term level is used widely
in ISA-88 part 1, but it does not refer to functional levels as ISA-95 does. ISA-88 uses the term
level to identify parts of hierarchies such as the physical model, process model, recipes, control
activity model, and the procedural model. It is not a basic conceptual foundation as in ISA-95.
Therefore, in this technical report, the term "level" is generally used to refer only to ISA-95
functional levels.

Figure 9 illustrates the ISA-88 physical model overlaid onto the ISA-95 equipment hierarchy and
the curtailment of ISA-95 Level 3 activities that is required to avoid conflicting with ISA-88 control
of scheduled batches in process cells.
                                                            - 25 -                                ISA-TR-88.95.01

                        ISA95 Level 4 a ctivities   EN TERPRISE                 Source: ISA95 Part 3 Figure 8 ­ Work centers and
                               typically deal with        SITE                 work units ­ added equipment and control modules,
                                     these objects       AREA
                                                                                     added brackets and annotations on left side
       ISA95 Level 3
activities related to                                               Le gend
                                                                          contains 0 or more
   ISA8 8 controlled
        work centers                                                      contains 1 or more

 typically deal with     PROCESS           PRO DUCTI ON     PRODU CTION           STORAGE           WORK
       these objects         CELL                U NIT            L INE              ZONE         C ENTERS

    Process activities       U NIT               UNIT            WORK             STORAGE           WORK
     based on ISA88                                               CEL L               UNIT          U NITS
                        E QUI PME NT        E Q UIPM ENT
  typically deal with     MODULE              MODULE         E QU IPME NT        EQUIPMENT
         these objects                                         MODULE              MODU LE
                         CONTROL             CONTROL
                          MODULE              MODULE          CONTROL             CONTROL
                                                               MODULE              MODU LE

                        Equipment used in  Equipment used    Equipment used      Equipment used
                         batch production    in continuous     in repetitive or   for storage or
                                               productio n  discrete production     m ovem ent

Figure 10 -- Overall Physical/Equipment Model for using ISA-95 Part 3 together with ISA-
                            88 Part 1 applied to all Work Centers and Work Units

Also illustrated in Figure 9 is the ISA-95 part 3 concept of work centers and work units, which
directly correlate in batch production to the process cells and units. Although not its original
scope, ISA-88 control is increasingly being applied across multiple manufacturing domains, not
just for batch production, and could formally encompass them in the future. In such scenarios,
the depicted curtailment of ISA-95 level 3 activities applies equally within the corresponding work
centers in addition to process cells. This is depicted in Figure 10, along with the ISA-88
equipment modules and control modules that would be (and in most cases are already) used to
implement most of equipment control requirements within the work centers and work units.

4.2 Categories of information exchanged

ISA-95 is focused on the information exchanged between business and control systems. The
data exchanged is limited to the information the business systems need to know to plan and
schedule manufacturing processes and record production information from the manufacturing
process.

The ISA-88 standard focuses on the detailed information needed to run the manufacturing
process, This is more technical information than is needed by the business systems to plan,
schedule and record production data. The categories of information exchanged are thus
generally limited to those illustrated in Figure 11 (from ISA-95 Part 3, Figure 4) and the contents
summarized below.

ISA-95 Product Definition Information
· Recipes

                o General recipes are typically owned and maintained as a level 4 function
                o Site recipes could be level 3 or 4 functions
                o Master recipes are typically level 3 functions
o Control recipes are created as a level 3 function but are sent to and used by level
     2 functions

                                                     Source: ISA95 Part 3 Figure 4 -
                                                   Categories of information exchange

                 Business planning &
                 logistics information

                    Plant production scheduling,
                   operational management, etc

   Product        Production      Production        Production
  definition       capability       schedule       performance
 information      information                      information
                                  information
(What must be    (What resources                    (What actual
defined to make   are available)  (What actual     production was
                                  production will
   a product)                      be executed)       achieved)

Manufacturing operations &
      control information

     Production operations, maintenance
       operations, quality operations, etc

                          Figure 11 -- ISA-95 Categories of information exchanged

ISA-95 Production Capability Information
· Information about plant resource (equipment, personnel, material)
· In ISA-88 terms

                o Equipment:
                            Capabilities of equipment entities as described by attributes in an
                                information model
                            The master recipes this equipment is capable of running
                            Equipment status to be used to determine availability

                o Material
                            ISA-88 does not address this

                o Personnel
                            ISA-88 does not address this

ISA-95 Production Schedule Information
· The ISA-88 batch schedule corresponds to the ISA-95 dispatch list; this is a lower level

  scheduling object as it is derived from the ISA-95 detailed production schedule
                o ISA-88 does not address scheduling functions/activities above the ISA-95
                     dispatch list

· ISA-95 detailed production schedules and dispatch lists may contain data that is placed in a
  control recipe
                                                - 27 -                                                                                ISA-TR-88.95.01

                o What equipment to use or can be used (deferring to recipe execution to decide
                     from a set of equipment)

                o Formula data used to customize a control recipe
                            May be used for different reasons such as amount of material used,
                                messages to personnel, etc.

ISA-95 Production Performance Information
· ISA-88 batch history, production information and batch production records map to ISA-95 level

  3 activities (production data collection, production performance analysis, production tracking)
  which are used to produce the production performance information sent to level 4 as well as
  provide more immediate feedback to the ISA-95 level 3 scheduling activities and flowing
  through production dispatching to production execution.
· ISA-88 uses many different names for production data

                o Batch history
                o Production information (part 2)
                o ISA 88 Part 4 calls it Batch Production Record
                o Process management activity model calls it Batch and Process Cell Information
                o Unit supervision activity model calls it Batch and Unit Information
                o Process control activity model calls it Data

5 ISA-88 Control Activity Model and the ISA-95 Production Operations
     Management Model

                                                 Product      Producti on           Producti on                          Produc tion
                                                de fini tion  capabili ty            schedule                           performance

    Recipe   P rodu ction     P ro ductio n                                          Detailed
Management                                                                          produ ction
            Planning and     In formatio n                                          s ched uling
             Sche duling     Man agem ent

                                                               Prod uction                                              Production
                                                                 resource                                                 tra cking
                                                              man agemen t
               Process
            Manage ment                                                             Prod uctio n                                       Prod uction
                                                                                    disp atchin g                                     Perfo rmance

                                                                                                                                         analysis

                Unit                                             Pro duc t                                              Production
            Su pervision                                        definition
                                                              man agemen t                                                  data
                                                                                                                        collection

                Process                                                              Prod uctio n
                Con tro l                                                             execution
                                                                                    management
            Personnel and
            E nviro nmental                      E q u ip me n t a n d p ro ce ss   Op e rati on a l  Op e rati o na l  E q u ip me n t a n d pro ce ss
                                                sp ec if ic p rod u cti o n rul es   co m ma nd s     re sp on se s     s pe ci f ic da ta
              Prote ction
                             Outside the scope                                      Production level 1-2 functions
                             of this standard

Source: ISA88 Part 1 Figure 19 - Control activity model ­ no changes to original 88 model
            ISA95 Part 3 Figure 9 ­ Activity model of production operations management ­ no changes to original 95 model

Figure 12 -- ISA-88 Control Activity Model and ISA-95 Production Operations Management
                                                                 Model

5.1 Mapping activity models

The ISA-88 control activity model and the ISA-95 production operations management model are
depicted in Figure 12. Each defines a set of activities. The control activity model defines
activities commonly performed in batch process cells. The ISA-95 production operations
management model defines activities commonly performed in a production environment, this
model is intended to fit batch, continuous and discrete processes, so it shows a wider scope than
the ISA-88 control activity model.

The ISA-88 control activities can be mapped onto the ISA-95 process operations management
model as shown in Figure 13 and listed in the table below. In the figure the rounded rectangles
and italicized labels represent ISA-88 control activities and their positioning shows how they
relate to the ISA-95 activities. The size of the rounded rectangles has no meaning except to
show the superposition of the activity domains.

 IS A- 95           I SA-95                  IS A- 95                                ISA-95      Legend:
 Prod uct         Produ ction              Produ cti on                           Pro ductio n
def in iti on     capability                sc hedul e                           perf orm an ce  Dashed rounded
                                                                                                 rec tangles are IS A-
                                                                                                 88 activities

                                                                                                 Solid ovals are ISA-
                                                                                                 95 activities

      IS A- 88                                     IS A- 95                                                  ISA-88
      Rec ipe                              Detailed production                                            Pr odu ctio n
  Manageme nt                                                                                            In for mat ion
                                                 schedu li ng                                           Management
(General & Site)
                                                   IS A- 95                                          ISA-95
                              I SA-95            Produ cti on                      ISA-95         Pro ductio n
                     Production resource        dispatching                      Prod uctio n    Perf orm an ce

                          managem ent                                             tr ac king        analysis

                      ISA-88
                   Prod uct ion
                  Planning and
                   Scheduling

                           I SA-95                   IS A-8 8                          ISA-95
                    Product definition     Process Management                    Production data

                       managem ent                  IS A- 95                         c oll ection
         ISA-88                            Production execution
Recipe Management                                                                              Equipment and process
 (Master & Control)                             managem ent                                    specific data

 Equipment and process                    Op erat ional  Op er at io nal                                     ISA-88 Unit
specific production rules                  commands      responses                                           S up ervisi on
                                                                                                             ISA-88 Process
                                          ISA-95 Production level 1-2 functions
                                                                                                                   Control

 Source: ISA-95 Part 3 Figure 9 ­ Activity model of production operations management ­ objects spread out and
relabeled, ISA-88 Part 1 Figure 19 ­ Control activity model resized and rearranged to map onto the ISA-95 figure

    Figure 13 -- ISA-88 Control Activity Model mapped onto ISA-95 Part 3 Figure 9 ­
                                       Production Operations Management

NOTE: This Technical Report uses comparison tables to list the major activities defined in
ANSI/ISA-95.00.03 Production Operations Management and explains how each activity is either
addressed or not addressed in ISA-88.00.01.

Table 2 -- Comparison Table: ISA-95 Production Operations Management Activities in
                                 relation to ISA-88. Batch Control Activities

      ISA-95 Production Operations                      ISA-88 Batch Control Activities
           Management Activities           Recipe Management (General and Site)
                                           Recipe Management (Site and Master)
Level 4 Product Definition (not in scope)
Product Definition Management              Production Planning and Scheduling
Detailed Production Scheduling
Production Dispatching                     Process Management
Production Resource Management             Production Information Management
Production Execution Management
Production Tracking
                                                                                                                   - 29 -                                                                                                        ISA-TR-88.95.01

      ISA-95 Production Operations                                                                                              ISA-88 Batch Control Activities
           Management Activities
                                                                                                                   Unit Supervision
Production Performance Analysis                                                                                    Process Control
Production Data Collection
Level 0-1-2 Process Control (not in
scope)

This mapping shows the coarse relationship between ISA-88 and ISA-95 activities; however a
more detailed mapping reveals that there is not a one to one mapping. The subsections below
provide more information on the detailed mappings for the ISA-88 and ISA-95 activities. A
noteworthy example detailed in the following subsection is the weak mapping between ISA-88
Process Management and ISA-95 Resource Management.

The lines in the ISA-88 control activity model show relationships between activities, not data
flows. The above mapping of the ISA-88 control activities to the ISA-95 production operations
management model reveals that the ISA-95 information flows are applicable to ISA-88 control
activities, at least on a coarse level.

5.2 Alignment of ISA-88 Process Management and ISA-95 Production
         Resource/Execution Management Activities

ISA-95 part 3 focuses on work center, area and site levels, but ISA-88 deals only with a process
cell and the lower equipment entities it contains.

There is overlap with ISA-88 Process Management in the process cell as is illustrated in Figure

14. When this occurs remember that any ISA88-controlled batch is constrained to a single

process cell; however, ISA-95 Production Execution Management and Production Resource

Management may span multiple work centers (i.e. process cells, production units, production

lines, and storage cells).

   Prod uct                               P rodu ction                                                             Produ ction                                                                         Recipe                     Producti on                  Producti on
  definition                              d ispatching                                                                                                                                             Manag ement                   Plan ning and                 I nf ormat ion
man agemen t                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Schedu ling                 Management
                                                                                                                                                                                                       M as ter
                                                                                                                   cap ability                                                      Detai le d         Recipe                                                             Batch and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Process Cell
                                                                                                                                                                                    pr oducti on                             B atch       Batch Pro gress                 Information
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Schedulin g    and Process Cell
                                                       Dispatch                                     Pers onn el                                                                     schedul ing                           Informati on  Status Information
                                                          list                                     availab ility
Pro d u ct p ro d uc tio n ru le s                                                                                                                                    D eta iled
  an d d e tai le d p ro d u ct i on                                                                                                                Cu rrentEquipme ntpr oduct io n
                                                                                                                                                       informatio navailability
                              rou t in g                                                                                                                              sche dule
                                                                                                  M ate ri al and
                                           P rodu ction  Pro du c tio n     Pro duction                energ y     P roducti on                                                     Resource                      Batch and        Manag e
                                                         in f o rma ti o n      data                                resourc e                                                       capa bilit y                   Resource      Pro cess C ell
                                            execution                                              availab ility                                                                                                 I nfo rmati on   Resources
                                          manag emen t      P ro d u ct i   collectio n
                                                                      on                                           management                                         R esource                                                                  Process Cell
                                                                                                                                                                     av ai labili ty                                                             Information
                                                               e v en t s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Coll ect Batch
              O p era tio n a l           O p era tio n a l                                                                                                                         Pr oducti on   Mana ge          B atch                                         and Process Cell
                co mma n d s              re sp o n se s                                                                                                                            di spat ching  Batches       Informati on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I nf ormat ion

                                          Level 1-2                                                                Level 1-2
                                          Functions                                                                Func tions

Source: ISA95 Part 3 Figure 19 ­ Production execution management activity model interfaces                                                                                                              Uni t, Reci pes,                        Commands and
            ISA95 Part 3 Figure 11 ­ Production resource management activity model interfaces                                                                                                                                                   Status
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Commands and Batch                           Information

                                                                                                                                                                                                          an d S tatus           Uni t Supervision
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Information

ISA88 Part 1 Figure 22 ­ Process Management

Figure 14 -- ISA-95 Production Resource/Execution Management and ISA-88 Process
                                                Management Activities
Table 3 -- Comparison Table: ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource/Execution Management
                            in relation to ISA-88 Process Management Activities

ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource &                                      How it applies to ISA-88 Process Management
          Execution Management

                          Produ ction                                        Recipe                     Producti on                  Producti on
                                                                         Manag ement                   Plan ning and                 Information
                          cap ability                     Detai led                                     Schedu ling                 Management
                                                                             M as ter
                                                          pr oducti on       Recipe                                                             Batch and
                                                                                                                                                Process Cell
           Pers onn el                      D eta iled    schedul ing                              B atch       Batch Pro gress                 Information
          availab ility                    pr oduct io n                                        Schedulin g    and Process Cell
                                                                                                Informati on  Status Information
Equipme nt                                  sche dule
availability
                          P roducti on                    Re source                                      Manag e
         M ate ri al and   resourc e                      capa bilit y                                 Pro cess C ell
              energ y                                                                                   Resources
                          management        R esource                                   Batch and
          availab ility                    av ailability                                 Resource
                          Current                                                      I nfo rmati on                  Process Cell
                             informatio n                                                                              Information
                                                          Pr oducti on   Mana ge            B atch
                                                          di spat ching  Batches         Informati on                                       Coll ect Batch
                                                                                                                                         and Process Cell

                                                                                                                                             Information

                          Level 1-2
                          Func tions

                                                                              Uni t, Reci pes,                        Commands and
                                                                                                                      Status
                                                                         Commands and Batch                           Information

                                                                                an d S tatus           Uni t Supervision
                                                                               Information

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.5 Production resource management ­ see section 6.4 of this technical
report for relationships of other aspects to ISA-88 Planning and Scheduling

                                                                         The following recommendation to revise ISA-88
                                                                         part 1 has been submitted to the ISA88
                                                                         committee:

                                                                         Both ISA-95 and ISA-88 contain functions called

                                                                         resource management. While they might look

                                                                         like overlap, they are not.                                Resource

                                                                         management as described in ISA-95 is strategic

                                                                         and sometimes tactical, but essentially always

                                                                         forward-looking. Resource management as

                                                                         described in ISA-88 Process Cell Management

                                                                         is, in reality, resource tracking and execution

                                                                         related allocation. Revising the language to

                                                                         emphasize that the two functions are, indeed,

                                                                         different and complimentary rather than

                                                                         overlapping will make the joint use of the two

                                                                         standards less confusing. Refer to Annex B for

                                                                         specific recommended revision to ISA-88 part 1,

                                                                         section 6.5.2.

Production resource management shall be                                  ISA-88 process management deals with this in a
defined as the collection of activities that                             process cell but is constrained by the batch
manage the information about resources                                   schedule (= ISA-95 dispatch list). The batch
required by production operations. The                                   schedule is limited to the process cell boundary.
resources include machines, tools, labor (with
specific skill sets), materials, and energy, as
defined in the Part 1 object models.
                                     - 31 -                          ISA-TR-88.95.01

ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource &               How it applies to ISA-88 Process Management
          Execution Management

Direct control of these resources in order to     ISA-88 process management is responsible for
meet production requirements is performed in      reservation, arbitration, assignment, and
other activities, such as production dispatching  allocation of resources, primarily equipment
and production execution management.              resources.

Management of information about segments of Segments of production are unit
production is also an activity in resource recipes/procedures, etc.
management.

Management of the resource information may        ISA-88 is intended to apply to manual as well as
be handled by computer systems, but it may        automated processes.
be partly or entirely handled by manual
processes.

Management of the resources may include           Process management does not deal with future
local resource reservation systems to manage      availability. Scheduling does this.
information about future availability. There may
be separate reservation systems for each          Local reservation is assumed to be within the
managed critical resource. There may be           process cell.
separate activities for each type of resource,
or combined activities for sets of resources.     It is acceptable to have a separate reservation
                                                  system for each managed resource.

Information about resources needed for a          Other than current production status origination
segment of production must be maintained and      of this information is outside the scope of ISA-88
provided on the available, committed, and
unattainable capacity for specific periods of     ISA-88 process mgt assigns resources so it has
time of specified resources as defined in         input to resource available and committed status
Part 1.                                           but it does not collect unattainable status.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.5.3 Tasks in production resource management

Production resource management tasks may
include:

a) Providing personnel, material, and             Beyond scope of ISA-88. ISA-88 activities may
equipment resource definitions. The               use the definitions but they do not provide them.
information may be provided on demand or
on a defined schedule, and may be
provided to people, to applications, or to
other activities.
ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource &            How it applies to ISA-88 Process Management
          Execution Management

b) Providing information on resource           ISA-88 process management does some of this,
(material, equipment, or personnel)            specifically dealing with current status
capability (committed, available, or           information within the scope of the batch
unattainable). The information is based on     schedule (ISA-95 dispatch list).
the current statuses, future reservations,
and future needs (as identified in the
production plan and detailed production
schedule) and is specific for resources, for
defined time spans and process segments.
It may include information on current
balance and losses to product cost
accounting and may be provided on
demand or on a defined schedule, and may
be provided to people, to applications, or to
other activities.

c) Ensuring that requests for acquisition of   ISA-88 does not generally initiate requests for
resources to meet future operational           future operational capabilities. It does deal with
capabilities are initiated.                    short time horizon issues such as arbitration,
                                               allocation, reservation within the scope of the
                                               batch schedule.

d) Ensuring that equipment is available for    Batch control systems are often programmed to
the assigned tasks, and that job titles are    check personnel, material and equipment
correct and training is current for personnel  qualification checks, but the ISA-88 standard
assigned to tasks. EXAMPLE: Checking           does not address this.
that an equipment sterilization status is
correct ("Clean") before it is assigned to a
production operation.

e) Providing information on the location of    Within a process cell for material and equipment.
resources and assignment of resources to
areas of production. EXAMPLE: Providing a      ISA-88 Part 1 6.5.2 Manage Process Cell
location for a mobile inspection machine       Resources:
that can be used in multiple locations.
                                               "Process cell resource management must know
                                               which materials are in the process cell, their
                                               location, and their disposition."

f) Coordinating the management of              ISA-88 does not address this.
resources with maintenance resource
management and quality resource
management.

g) Collecting information on the current       6.5.3 Collect batch and process cell information
state of personnel, equipment, and material    addresses this.
resources and on the capacity and
capability of the resources. Information may
be collected based on events, on demand
and/or on a defined schedule, and may be
collected from equipment, people, and/or
applications.
                                     - 33 -                                   ISA-TR-88.95.01

ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource &                How it applies to ISA-88 Process Management
          Execution Management

h) Collecting future needs such as from the        Batch control systems are often programmed to
production plan, current production,               do this but ISA-88 does not address this.
maintenance schedules, or vacation
schedules.

i) Maintaining personnel qualification test Batch control systems are often programmed to

result information.                                do this but ISA-88 does not address this.

j) Maintaining equipment capability test Batch control systems are often programmed to

result information.                                do this but ISA-88 does not address this.

k) Managing reservations for future use of Batch control systems are often programmed to

resources.                                         do this but ISA-88 does not address this.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.5.4 Resource availablity

Resource availability provides time-specific       ISA-88 production planning and scheduling
definitions needed for scheduling and reporting    would address this or use the data obtained from
on a resource. The resource availability must      a source outside the scope of ISA-88.
take into account elements such as working
hours, labor regulations, holiday calendar,
breaks, plant shutdowns, and shift schedules.

EXAMPLE: The available time can be a fixed
time or a flexible time. For example, in
personnel resource management the time for
lunch may be flexible between 11:00 AM and
2:00 PM, or a machine may be unavailable for
8 hours within a 16-hour period. Personnel
availability may define working days and days
off; Monday to Friday are available for work,
Saturday and Sunday are unavailable for work,
or available for 2 days early shift, 2 days late
shift, 2 days night shift, and 3 days off. ISA 95
Part 3 Figure 12 illustrates the types of
information about the capacity of a single
resource that may be provided by resource
management.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.5.5 Collecting future committed resource information

Production resource management manages             ISA-88 production planning and scheduling
committed resource availability based on the       would address this or use the data obtained from
detailed production schedule and product           a source outside the scope of ISA-88.
requirements. An assigned resource changes
from available to committed for the period of
time defined by the production plan, or until
the completion of the scheduled task.
ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource &                 How it applies to ISA-88 Process Management
          Execution Management

NOTE: Once the schedule window requiring            ISA-88 production planning and scheduling
the resource is completed, the resource is          addresses this. In ISA-88 resource reservation
typically taken back to the available state,        and allocation are addressed at the execution
unless it was already dispatched for a new          level ­ not at this planning and scheduling level.
assignment. In the most basic systems, the
end of the planned schedule window triggers
this ending of committed time window. But for
more sophisticated systems, it may be
triggered by production tracking that relays the
actual time the work is completed to production
resource management.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.5.6 Collecting resource definition changes

The production resource management activity         ISA-88 uses the resource definition changes but
includes collecting information about new,          does not manage this data.
modified, or deleted resource definitions,
classes, and instances. This includes
information on resource property definitions.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.5.7 Personnel resource information management

Management of information about personnel           ISA-88 does not directly address this, but such
resources and future personnel availability is      issues as operator qualifications can be address
part of resource management.                        in the ISA-88 recipe structures or as part of the
                                                    batch schedule.
EXAMPLE: If an individual has vacation
planned or is known sick for a certain period of
time, then a business-level Human Resource
(HR) function may report this situation to
production resource management. This
prevents production from assigning the
resource within this period of time. As an
extension, the whole working schedule of the
personnel must be known by production in
order to make the right allocation decisions.

This may include information such as levels of
certification, tracking of time spent for specific
tasks, and managing availability of personnel
resources. In some cases this information is
maintained and managed in corporate HR
(Human Resource) systems, but must be
available to manufacturing. Often the level of
detail required for manufacturing, such as
certification expiration dates and union line of
seniority, is not maintained in the HR systems.
In these cases labor management can be
considered part of the manufacturing
operations activities.

The production resource management activity
also has to address skill levels. Each member
                                     - 35 -                            ISA-TR-88.95.01

ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource &                How it applies to ISA-88 Process Management
          Execution Management

of the personnel may have recognized skills
through qualification tests results. This defines
a skill profile utilized by production resource
management to allow the dispatch of the
qualified personnel to each specific production
activity.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.5.8 Equipment resource information management

Management of information about equipment          ISA-88 does not address future availability; it
resources and future equipment availability is     does some management of current equipment
part of resource management. Maintenance           status.
operations often have a major impact on
resource utilization. Periods of future
unavailability, based on yet unscheduled
maintenance requirements, also affect
utilization.

EXAMPLE: When a piece of equipment is
reported defective, a maintenance task request
could request the equipment to be classified
as unavailable. The equipment would be also
classified as unavailable if preventive
maintenance is scheduled for this equipment.
When the equipment is repaired or the
preventive maintenance activity is over, the
maintenance task would request that the
equipment is to be taken back to its available
status. Selected equipment may be submitted
to an equipment capability test as defined in
the Part 1 standard. This test result
determines if specific equipment may be
assigned for a specific task in a specific
process segment.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.5.9 Material resource information management

Management of information about material and       ISA-88 states this is done for current status, but
                                                   it doesn't say how. Future availability is not
energy resources and future material and           addressed.

energy availability is part of resource            ISA-88 Part 1 6.5.2 Manage Process Cell
                                                   Resources:
management.  Production          resource
                                                   "Process cell resource management must know
management is informed as material is              which materials are in the process cell, their
                                                   location, and their disposition."
received or energy is made available. Future

availability is also maintained to provide

information for production scheduling.

Production resource management includes

managing information about changes in

material conditions, such as when material

lot/sub lot or energy source is found to have

changed its specification. Changes are often

indicated from QA test results.

EXAMPLE: A material lot may change from
ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource &                                                      How it applies to ISA-88 Process Management
          Execution Management

"dry" to "wet," a pH may change from 7.0 to
7.1, or available electrical power may change
from 300 kW to 280 kW.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.8 Production execution management
ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.8.1 Activity definition

Production execution management shall be
defined as the collection of activities that direct
the performance of work, as specified by the
contents of the production dispatch list
elements.

   Prod uct                              P rodu ction                                        Recipe                   Producti on                  Producti on
  definition                             d ispatc hing                                   Manag ement                 Plan ning and                Information
man agemen t                                                                                                         Schedu ling                  Management
                                                                                             Master
                                         Dispatch                                            Recipe                B atch       Batch Pro gress               Batch and
                                            list                                                                Schedulin g    and Process Cell               Process Cell
                                                                                                                Informati on  Status Information              Information

Pro d u ct p ro d uc tio n ru le s
  an d d e tai le d p ro d u cti on

                              rou tin g

                                          P rodu ction  P ro du c tio n    Pro ductio n                Batch and       Manag e
                                                        in f o rma ti o n      data                     Resource     Pro cess C ell
                                           execution                                                  I nfo rmation   Resources
                                         manag emen t      P ro d u cti    collectio n
                                                                     on                                                              Process Cell
                                                                                                                                     Information
                                                              e v en ts
                                                                                                                                                          Coll ect Batch
              O p era tio n a l          O p era tio n a l                               Mana ge         B atch                                        and Process Cell
                co mma n d s             re sp o n se s                                  Batches      Informati on
                                                                                                                                                           Information

                                         Level 1-2
                                         Functions

                                                                                              Uni t, Reci pes,                      Commands and
                                                                                                                                    Status
                                                                                         Commands and Batch                         Information

                                                                                                an d S tatus         Uni t Supervision
                                                                                               Information

The production execution management activity                                             In ISA-88 the units of work are batches.
includes selecting, starting and moving those
units of work (for example lots, sublots, or                                             The appropriate sequence is a recipe procedure.
batches) through the appropriate sequence of
operations to physically produce the product.                                            Work is done at lower procedural levels such as
The actual work (manual or automatic) is part                                            unit recipes, operations, and phases in unit
of the Level 2 functions.                                                                supervision which maps to ISA-95 level 2.

NOTE: The definition of a sequence may take                                              Tracking of labor and material usage can be
the form of a detailed production route specific                                         collected as data in a recipe if needed, but labor
for a particular produced item. Production                                               data is typically not a concern in the process
execution transacts the individual units of work                                         industries.
from one operation or step to the next,
collecting and accounting for such things as                                             In ISA-88 sequences map to procedures.
actual materials consumed, labor hours used,
yields and scrap at each step or operation.
This provides visibility into the status and
location of each lot or unit of work or
production order at any moment in the plant,
and offers a way to provide external customers
with visibility into the status of an order in the
plant.
                                     - 37 -                           ISA-TR-88.95.01

ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource &           How it applies to ISA-88 Process Management
          Execution Management

Production execution management may use       This is a common practice but the ISA-88
information from previous production runs,    standard does not have a data flow showing this.
captured in production tracking, in order to
perform local optimizations and increase
efficiencies.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.8.3 Tasks in production execution management

The production execution management           ISA-88 process management is the collection of
activities include the coordination of the    control functions that manage all batches and
manual and automated processes in a site or   resources within a process cell.
area. This often requires well-defined
communication channels to automated control   The following request has been submitted to the
equipment.                                    ISA95 committee:

                                              Committee asks ISA95 to modify part 3 to state
                                              that production execution mgt also includes
                                              activities in a process cell, proposed new text is:

                                              Production execution management activities
                                              include the coordination of the manual and
                                              automated processes in a site, or area or work
                                              center.

                                              NOTE: ISA-95 level 3 and ISA-88 overlap at the
                                              process cell level. Level 3 functions as defined
                                              in ISA-95 will not typically cover units. Figure 10
                                              is primarily for use with batch processes ­ the
                                              difference is that there is a batch standard
                                              defining ISA-95 level 3, 2 and 1 activities where
                                              in continuous and discrete processes there is no
                                              lower level standard and in discrete there is a
                                              tradition of ERP and MES functions having more
                                              interaction with the shop floor than in batch
                                              processes.

Production execution management tasks may
include the following:

a) Directing the performance of work and Work as in batches, level 2 activities are unit

initiating Level 2 activities.                recipes/procedures.

b) Ensuring that the correct resources Resources are specified by the recipe and
(equipment, materials, and personnel) are schedule.
used in production.

c) Confirming that the work is performed      This also applies in ISA-88, but how it is done is
according to the accepted quality             recipe and equipment specific.
standards. This may involve receiving
information from quality activities.          ISA-88 does not address quality as a separate
                                              topic as ISA-95 part 3 does.
ISA-95 Part 3 Production Resource &              How it applies to ISA-88 Process Management
          Execution Management

d) Ensuring that resources are valid for the     Typically done in a recipe or in control logic,
assigned tasks. EXAMPLE: This may be             equipment class definition, equipment status, or
ensuring that equipment sterilization status     equipment logic.
is correct for the assigned operation (e.g., a
vessel is "Clean" before use in production).     Material release is outside the scope of ISA-88, it
EXAMPLE: Equipment certifications are            is assumed that information is available to
current, personnel qualifications are up to      scheduling or embedded in phase logic.
date, and materials are released for use.

e) Assigning resources under local run time      This applies directly in ISA-88.
control. EXAMPLE: The assignment of units
to a batch, if the detailed production
schedule does not define unit allocation.

f) Informing other activities when               This is a function of production information
unanticipated events result in the inability to  management. It is also a function of process
meet the work requirements.                      control and unit supervision. For example:
                                                 propagate a state from the lower level of a recipe
                                                 to a higher level and then, putting parts of the
                                                 recipe on hold or in manual mode.

g) Receiving information from production         ISA-88 process management does not perform
resource management about unanticipated          resource prediction; it presumes this is handled
future resource availability.                    outside the process management activity. The
                                                 data can be sent to process management via
                                                 Production Planning and Scheduling.

                                                 Production Planning and Scheduling is
                                                 responsible for "determining the availability of
                                                 resources as an input to the scheduling process."

h) Providing production information and          Some of this is done by Collect Batch and
events on production execution                   Process Cell Information. Some information
management, such as timing, yields, labor        is collected by Production Information
and material used, start of runs, and            Management directly from Unit Supervision.
completion of runs.
                                                    - 39 -                                                         ISA-TR-88.95.01

5.3 Alignment of ISA-88 Recipe Management and ISA-95 Product Definition Management
         Activities

  Table 4 -- Comparison Table: ISA-95 Part 3 Product Definition Management activities in
                               Relation to the ISA-88 Recipe Management Activity

ISA-95 Part 3 Product Definition Management                                  How it applies to ISA-88 Recipe
                                                                                           Management

 Product                                  Detailed                               Manage         General Recipe       Define General
defini ti on                            production                           General Recipe   Proc edural Element  Recipe Procedural
                                        scheduling
                                                                             General Rec ipe                             Element

    Product       Work center specific                          Production       Manage          General Rec ipe
   de finition    product production                            dispatching    Site Recipe    Procedural Element
management         rules and detailed
                   production routing    Production                             Site Recipe                                    General Recipe
                                          execution                                                                         Procedural Element
                                        management                               Manage
                                                                             Master Recipe                                       Information

 E quipment and
process specific
production rules

Level 1-2                                                                                        Master Recipe       Define Master
Functions                                                                                     Procedural Element   Recipe Procedural

                                                                                                                         Element

                                                                             Master Recipe

                                                                                Pr oc ess
                                                                             Management

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.4.1 Activity definition

Product definition management shall be defined                               ISA-88 defines the Recipe Management
as the collection of activities that manage all of                           activity that is very similar in function to the
the Level 3 information about the product                                    Product Definition Management activity
required for manufacturing, including the product                            defined in ISA-95. The ISA-88 activity is a
production rules.                                                            well defined four level hierarchy ranging
                                                                             from the General Recipe that may well exist
                                                                             at ISA-95 level 4 to the Control Recipe that
                                                                             is actually executed in the ISA-88 Process
                                                                             Management and Unit Supervision
                                                                             activities. The ISA-95 Product Definition
                                                                             Management activity is focused primarily on
                                                                             the Master Recipe.

Product definition information is shared between
product production rules, bill of material, and bill
of resources. The product production rules
contain the information used to instruct a
manufacturing operation how to produce a
product. This may be called a general, site, or
master recipe (IEC 61512-1 and
ANSI/ISA88.00.01-1995 definition), standard
operating procedure (SOP), standard operating
conditions (SOC), routing, or assembly steps
based on the production strategy used. The
product definition information is made available
to other Level 3 functions and to Level 2
functions as required.
ISA-95 Part 3 Product Definition Management       How it applies to ISA-88 Recipe
                                                                Management

Product definition management includes            In most cases, this line goes through
management of the distribution of product         Process Management when the ISA-88
production rules. Some of the product production  models are used.
rules may exist in Level 2 and Level 1
equipment. When that is the case, downloads of
this information shall be coordinated with other
manufacturing operations management functions
to avoid affecting production. This information
may be included as part of operational
commands when the download is part of a
production execution management activity.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.4.3 Tasks in product definition management

Product definition management tasks may
include the following:

a) Managing documents such as                     Applies only to ISA-95.
manufacturing instructions, recipes, product
structure diagrams, manufacturing bills, and
product variant definitions.

b) Managing new product definitions.              In ISA-88, this would be a new recipe.

c) Managing changes to product definitions.       Applies equally to ISA-88 except that the
This may include the ability to route designs     approval process is not specified in ISA-88.
and manufacturing bill changes through an
appropriate approval process, management of
versions, tracking of modifications, and
security control of the information.

d) Providing product production rules to          This applies equally to ISA-88.
personnel or other activities. EXAMPLE:
These may take the form of manufacturing          Although the form is clearly different, ISA-88
steps, master recipes, machine setup rules,       makes no specific distinction between
and process flowsheets.                           recipes intended for people or automated
                                                  systems.

e) Maintaining the feasible            detailed   ISA-88 recipes contain equipment
production routings for products.                 requirement information which defines
                                                  which routings within a process cell may be
                                                  used for a given product.

f) Providing the product segment route to The product segment route in ISA-88 would

manufacturing operations in the level of detail be very similar to the feasible detailed

required by manufacturing operations.             production routings mentioned in e) above.

g) Managing the exchange of product               ISA-88 defines the General, Site and Master
definition information with Level 4 functions at  recipes as three levels of detail that can be
the level of detail required by the business      exchanged with any other function including
operations.                                       level 4 functions.

h) Optimizing product production rules based This is part of recipe management.
on process analysis and production
performance analysis.
                                 - 41 -                          ISA-TR-88.95.01

ISA-95 Part 3 Product Definition Management       How it applies to ISA-88 Recipe
                                                                Management

i) Generating and maintaining local               ISA-88 anticipates that these activities are
production rule sets indirectly related to        directed by a recipe ­ either as part of a
products, such as for cleaning, startup, and      product recipe or as a separate recipe for
shutdown.                                         the activity. EXAMPLE: Cleaning recipe.

j) Managing the Key Performance Indicator Could be embedded within the ISA-88
(KPI) definitions associated with products and recipe.
production.

NOTE: There are a number of tools to assist       ISA-88 is more specific about the form and
in the product definition management activity,    function of the recipe, which defines the
including mechanical and electronic               batch product.
computer-aided design (CAD), Computer-
Aided Engineering (CAE), and Computer-
Aided Software Engineering (CASE), recipe
management systems, Computer-Aided
Process Engineering (CAPE), and Electronic
Work Instructions (EWIs).

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.4.4 Product definition rule information

Product definition is the information exchanged   The equivalent information in ISA-88 would
with engineering, R&D and others to develop the   come from a Site Recipe or a General
site specific product production rules. This      Recipe if no Site Recipe is required. The
information may include R&D manufacturing         creation of a General Recipe is not in the
definitions that are translated and extended by   scope of ISA-95.
product definition management into site-specific
definitions using local material, equipment, and
personnel. This may also involve translation to
elements of a work order. EXAMPLE: Translation
to master recipes, machine setup rules, and
process flow diagrams. Product definition
management may also include managing other
product information in conjunction with
manufacturing information. This may include:

     · Customer requirements, product design,
          and test specifications.

· Process design and simulation

· Technical publications and service
     materials.

· Regulatory       filings  requirement
     information.
ISA-95 Part 3 Product Definition Management                   How it applies to ISA-88 Recipe
                                                                            Management

The product definition management activity                    This is similar to ISA-88 Functionality.
interacts with production dispatching and
production execution management to get the
work done and interacts with research
development and engineering to obtain the
product production rules for executing the work.
EXAMPLE: Production dispatching activities
may need to refer to production dependencies to
identify when a specific resource will be
required.

The product production rule identifies elements               This type of information is essential to the
of a work order and establishes relationships                 creation of any level of ISA-88 recipe.
between them. Each element can contain
information regarding personnel, equipment,
material, and product parameters. To perform
these functions, product definition management
may need to exchange information with resource
management.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.4.5 Detailed production routing

The product definition information includes                   In an ISA-88 implementation, the routing
dependencies of work order elements. Detailed                 described in ISA-95 typically defines the
work order element routing may contain a finer                order in which a specified sequence of
granularity of definition than is visible to                  recipes is to be executed in a specified
business systems, but is required for detailed                sequence of process cells.
routing of work between work centers (process
cells, production lines, and production units).
Detailed work order element routing is organized
by the physical production process. NOTE: A

detailed production routing is sometimes called a production
route, master business system route, master route, or
business route.
                                           - 43 -                                  ISA-TR-88.95.01

5.4 Alignment of ISA-88 Planning and Scheduling and ISA-95 Dispatching and Detailed
         Scheduling Activities

Source: ISA95 Part 3 Figure 9 ­ Activity model of                                IS A 95
production operations management ­ Call-outs added
                                                                       Level 4 to 3 schedule

                                                                      (Object model and attribut es
                                                                         defined in ISA95 part 2)

 Product      P ro duc tion  P ro duc tion           P ro duc tion               IS A 95
defin itio n  c apab ility    schedule              p erfor m ance
                                                                         Detailed schedule

                                                                           (No object model and
                                                                      attributes available in ISA95)

                               Detailed                                          IS A 95
                             production
                             scheduling                                      Dispatch list

                                                                           (No object model and
                                                                      attributes available in ISA95)

               Production                                Production
                 re so urce                                tracking

              management

                             Production                                Production
                             dispatching                              Performance

                                                                         analysis

                  Product                                Production
                definition                                    da ta
              management
                                                          collection

                              Production
                               execution
                             management

 Equipment and process       Op erational  Operation al    Equipment and process
specific production rules     commands     respo nses      specific data

                           Production level 1-2 functions

Figure 15 -- ISA-95 Dispatching and Detailed Scheduling Activities
Table 5 -- Comparison Table: ISA-95 Part 3 Dispatching and Detailed Scheduling in
                      Relation to ISA-88 Planning and Scheduling Activities

ISA-95 Part 3 Dispatching and Detailed                                   How it applies to ISA-88 Planning and
                     Scheduling                                                              Scheduling

                          Produ ction

                          cap ability                     Detai le d

                                                          pr oducti on

           Pers onn el                      D eta iled    schedul ing
          availab ility                    pr oduct io n

Equipme nt                                  sche dule
availability
                          P roducti on                    Resource
         M ate ri al and   resourc e                      capa bilit y
              energ y
                          management       R esource
          availab ility                    av ailability
                          Cu rrent
                             informatio n                 Pr oducti on
                                                          di spat ching

                          Level 1-2
                          Func tions

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.5 Production resource management ­ see section 5.2 of this technical
report for relationships of other aspects to ISA-88 Process Management

NOTE: Once the schedule window requiring the
resource is completed, the resource is typically
taken back to the available state, unless it was
already dispatched for a new assignment. In the
most basic systems, the end of the planned
schedule window triggers this ending of committed
time window. But for more sophisticated systems, it
may be triggered by production tracking that relays
the actual time the work is completed to production
resource management.

ISA-95 Part 3 Section 6.6 Detailed production scheduling

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.6.1 Activity definition

Detailed production scheduling shall be defined as                       The ISA-95 detailed production scheduling
the collection of activities that take the production                    activity is part of the ISA-88 production
schedule and determine the optimal use of local                          planning and scheduling activity.
resources to meet the production schedule
                                                       - 45 -  ISA-TR-88.95.01

       ISA-95 Part 3 Dispatching and Detailed                  How it applies to ISA-88 Planning and
                            Scheduling                                             Scheduling

requirements. This may include ordering the
requests for minimal equipment setup or cleaning,
merging requests for optimal use of equipment,
and splitting requests when required because of
batch sizes or limited production rates. Detailed
production scheduling takes into account local
situations and resource availability.

NOTE: Enterprise-level planning systems often do not have
the detailed information required to schedule specific work
centers, work center elements, or personnel.

ISA-95 Part 3 section 6.6.2 Activity model

ISA 95 Part 3 Figure 13 illustrates some of the                ISA-88 does not define detail for this
interfaces to detailed production scheduling                   activity, it does focus on activities involving
                                                               the receipt and processing of schedules
                  Production                                   (dispatch lists in ISA-95 terminology). For
                   sche dule                                   this reason there is no conflict between ISA-
                                                               88 Part 1 and ISA-95. Therefore for detailed
  Product                                                      guidance, a practitioner should rely on
definitions                                                    ANSI/ISA95.00.03.

 Resourc e         Detail ed       Reports on WIP and
av ai labil it y  p rod uc tion       work Completed
                  scheduli ng

 P ro duc tion    Detail ed        P r oduc tion
   reso urc e        product ion     tr ackin g

m an agem ent            schedule

                  Pro duc tion
                  dispa tching

ISA 95 Part 3 Figure 13 ­ Detailed production
scheduling activity model interfaces

ISA-95 Part 3 Section 6.7 Production dispatching
ISA-95 Part 3 Section 6.7.1 Activity definition

Production dispatching shall be defined as the                 The ISA-95 production dispatching activity is
collection of activities that manage the flow of               part of the ISA-88 production planning and
production by dispatching production to equipment              scheduling activity.
and personnel. This may involve:

a) Scheduling batches to start in a batch control
system.

b) Scheduling production runs to start in
production lines.

c) Specifying standard operating condition targets
in production units.

d) Sending work orders to work centers.
ISA-95 Part 3 Dispatching and Detailed                  How it applies to ISA-88 Planning and
                     Scheduling                                             Scheduling

e) Issuing work orders for manual operations.

EXAMPLE: Dispatched work may be machine
setup, grade change switchovers, equipment
cleaning, run rate setup, or production flow setup.

ISA-95 Part 3 Section 6.7.2 Activity model

ISA 95 part 3 Figure 16 shown below illustrates         ISA-95 defines production dispatching as the
some of the interfaces to production dispatching        source of dispatch lists. The ISA-95
                                                        dispatch list is the equivalent of the ISA-88
                                           De ta iled   batch scheduling information referenced in
                                         production     ISA-88 Part 1, Figure 22, as an input to
                                           s che d ule  process management from production
                                                        planning and scheduling. This is the
 Re so urce                     Pro duc tion            common point between the two standards.
av aila bility                    tr ackin g
                                                        The details of the ISA-95 production
                P r oduc tion   Dispatch list           dispatching activity are only covered very
                dispatching     relating work to        briefly in ISA-88 Part 1, section 6.3
                                resources               Production planning and scheduling. For
                                                        this reason there is no conflict between ISA-
  Detailed      Dispatch                                95 and ISA-88 Part 1. Therefore, for
production         list                                 detailed guidance, a practitioner should rely
                                                        on ANSI/ISA-95.00.03.
  routing

                 Pr odu ctio n
                  exec uti on
                management

ISA 95 part 3 Figure 16 ­ Production dispatching
activity model interfaces

5.4.1 Comparison of ISA-88 Planning and Scheduling and ISA-95 Dispatching/Detailed
            Scheduling Activities by Physical Hierarchy and Functional Levels

ISA-95 acknowledges different levels of planning and scheduling. The higher levels are more or
less out of scope of ISA-95 (e.g., development of a business plan and development of a demand
plan). That is because ISA-95 focuses on the integration of enterprise and control systems. The
development of a schedule and the flow of this information to level 3 is within scope of
enterprise-control system integration. ISA-95 also explains which scheduling activities (detailed
production scheduling and dispatching) and supporting activities (resource management) take
place within level 3. ISA-95 mentions the development of a batch list as part of the responsibility
of the Production Dispatching activity.

ISA-88 focuses on batch control within the Process Cell. In its Activity model, ISA-88 makes
clear that, before, during and after the execution of batch processes, several activities take place.
These include production planning and scheduling activities. From the ISA-88 perspective this is
a high level control activity that ISA-88 considers to be out of scope. Planning and scheduling
functions described in the two standards is illustrated in Figure 15 and by level in Table 7 below.
                                    - 47 -                                     ISA-TR-88.95.01

      Table 6 -- Comparison ISA-95 Schedule model versus ISA-88 Procedural elements

   Level Physical Level of detail   ISA-95                            ISA-88       EXAMPLE
                 model                                               Control
                                                                      Recipe   Schedule 2006-
4 (aims Enterprise Production of    Production schedule                        week 20-v1
                                    (Contains several level 4          Level
at level / Site    several          production orders)            NA. at this  Request 1:
                                                                  level        Produce x
3)                 products, or     Production request                         boxes with six
                                    (Contains one level 4         NA. at this  packs of
                   intermediates    production order. May         level        bounties
                                    contain several segments                   Request 2:
3 (aims Area(s) Production of a     which need to be executed                  Produce x
                                    in sequence, or parallel, in               boxes with six
at areas           product, or an   order to produced the                      packs of milky
                                    requested product or                       ways.
and                intermediate     intermediate)                              Segment 1:
                                                                               Produce x
work                                                                           bounties
                                                                               Segment 2:
centres)                                                                       Package x
                                                                               bounties
3 (aims Area       Production of a  Production segment            NA. at this  Segment 1:
at area            product, or an   requirement                   level        Produce x litres
and                intermediate     (The (production)order to                  of chocolate
work                                execute one product or        Procedure    Segment 2:
centres)           Production of    process segment, usually                   Produce
                   one or more      an intermediate)                           coconut mixture
3         Process  batches          Production segment                         Segment 1:
                                    requirement (within the                    Prepare cocoa
          cell                      upper segment)                             butter in
                                                                               Reactor *
2         Unit     Execution of a Production segment              Unit         Segment 1:
                                                                               Charge
                   unit procedure requirement (within the         procedure    ingredients
                                                                               Segment 2: Mix
                   to produce a upper segment)                                 ingredients

                   batch

2         Unit     Execution of an Production segment             Operation

                   operation as requirement

                   part of the      (within the upper segment)

                   execution of a

                   unit procedure

NOTE: Often this level of detail will not be the concern of the production schedule that level 4 sends to level 3. But,

it may be part of the detailed production schedule that defines the desired sequencing of work orders.

5.5 Alignment of ISA-88 Production Information Management and ISA-95 Data Collection,
         Analysis and Tracking Activities

This section of the technical report deals with the corresponding topics of ISA-88 Production
Information Management and ISA-95 (Work) Data Collection, Performance Analysis and Tracking.
The main ISA-95 work activity to be considered in this section is Production operations
management; however, it should be noted that similar topics for the other operations
management categories (maintenance, quality and inventory) are also partly considered.
 Table 7 -- ISA-95 Part 3 Production Data collection, Production Performance Analysis,
Production Tracking in relation to ISA-88 Production Information Management activities

ISA-95 Part 3 Production Data collection, Production                                 How it applies to ISA-88
      Performance Analysis, Production Tracking                                      Production Information

Production                      Production                                                    Management
dispatching                       tracking
                                                                               Typically all of these functions are
     Status on                                  Resou rce                      included in the ISA-88 Production
actual production                               history data                   Information Management activity.
                                                                               However, they are not detailed in
 and equipment                                                                 that standard. The discussion of
                                                                               these functions is much richer and
 Production      Production     Production       Resource      Production      much more detailed in the ISA-95
  e xe cution    in form ation      d a ta      history data  pe rfo rm a nce  standard and is a better reference
management                                                                     for that kind of information.
               Pro ductio n      colle ctio n                    a na ly sis
                     events

           Resource data, operations data,

               equipment status, equipment
configuration, ala rms, operator actions,

                             operator comments

                                 Level 1-2
                                Functions
                                               - 49 -                            ISA-TR-88.95.01

Annex A - Relationship of Activities and Terminology Between
                                 the Two Standards

A.1 How do the ANSI/ISA-88 and ANSI/ISA-95 standards relate?

                        Table 8 -- Listing Overlapping Terminology

Grouping    ISA-88      Ref ISA-95 Ref                                  Comment
             Term

Materials Batch                  Material Lot          A batch is distinguishable from a material
                                                       lot only in that a batch is associated with
Materials   NA                   Material              the production of the material by an ISA-88
                                 sublot                recipe; for example, a lot of raw material is
Materials   Lot                  Material Lot          not a batch although an input intermediate
Models      Area                 Area                  could be material from a batch of another
Models      Site        4.2.2 Site                     batch process.

                                                       A uniquely identifiable subset of a material
                                                       lot, but not addressed directly in ISA-88

                                                       The terms are essentially the same

                                                       The terms are essentially the same

                                                       The terms are essentially the same except:
                                                       - In ISA-88 site is an optional element.
                                                       - In ISA-95 at least one site must exist.

Models      Process cell 4.2.4 Process cell            Identical - ISA-95 actually references the
Models
Models                                                 ISA-88 standard
Scheduling
            Unit               Unit                    Identical - ISA-95 actually references the

                                                       ISA-88 standard

            Enterprise 3.13, Enterprise 3.10, The terms are essentially the same

                        4.2.1                  5.2.1

            Reservation 5.6.2 Resource 5.1.2 Allocation as used in the context of ISA-95

                               allocation .1 really maps to reservation of equipment in

                                                       ISA-88 (see also ISA-88 allocation)

Scheduling  Batch       I: Dispatch 6.7.4 In ISA-88 a batch schedule includes
            schedule
            Batch list  6.3, List (Part 3)             identity, resource and parameter
            (Part 2)
                        5.4                            information sufficient to define a control

                        II:                            recipe for one or more batches in a specific

                        2.0                            process cell from the master recipe

                                                       specified.

                                                       This is the equivalent of a dispatch list

                                                       derived from an ISA-95 detailed production

                                                       schedule.
 Grouping   ISA-88           Ref ISA-95 Ref                      Comment
Scheduling   Term

                                  Committed   In ISA-95 this is a scheduling related term
                                              indicating that something is scheduled to
                                              be used but may not yet been used. ISA-
                                              88 does not use or define this term.

Scheduling Batch             6.3, Production  In ISA-88 a batch schedule includes
                   schedule
                             5.4 Schedule     identity, resource and parameter

                                              information sufficient to define a control

                                              recipe for one or more batches, in a

                                              specific process cell, from the master

                                              recipe specified.

                                              In ISA-95 a production schedule is a

                                              collection of production work orders and

                                              their sequencing involved in production of

                                              one or more products, at the level of detail

                                              required for manufacturing.

                                              The primary difference is that whilst an

                                              ISA-88 batch schedule is for a specific

                                              process cell, in ISA-95 a schedule may

                                              span multiple work centers/products.

Scheduling Plan                   Plan        The terms are essentially the same
Scheduling Allocation
                                              Allocation in ISA-88 uses reserved or

                                              otherwise available equipment, via

                                              arbitration rules, to dedicate equipment to a

                                              specific batch. Unless explicitly shared, an

                                              allocated unit in ISA-88 is subsequently not

                                              available to anything else until released.

Models      Level            3 Level          In ISA-88 a level is a simply a reference to

                             4.2              a position in a hierarchical model. In ISA-

                             ...              95 levels are generally used to represent

                                              the position of an activity against the

                                              functional levels derived from the Purdue

                                              Reference Model (PRM) as discussed

                                              elsewhere in this report.

            Resource                          3.27 Defined in ISA-95 part one to be

                                              constrained to be a collection of people,

                                              equipment and materials. ISA-88

                                              resources are equivalent to ISA-95

                                              equipment resources. IEC 62264-1 Section

                                              3.30 defines resource as "enterprise entity

                                              that provides some or all of the capabilities

                                              required by the execution of an enterprise

                                              activity and/or business process (in the

                                              context of this standard, a collection of

                                              personnel, equipment, and/or material)"
                                        - 51 -           ISA-TR-88.95.01

Grouping  ISA-88        Ref  ISA-95     Ref     Comment
           Term        3.10

ISA-88    Common                        5.1.2 Typically refers to an equipment entity such
                                        .1 as a control module or equipment module
Only Terms resource
                                                 that is not permanently configured as part
          Equipment    3.16                      of a unit but may be acquired by or used by
          module       3.10                      two or more units.
          Control
          module                                 The ISA-95 equipment hierarchy model
                                                 purposely did not go lower than the unit.
          Formula 3.23 BOM etc                   This was done to defer to the ISA-88
                                                 definition of all lower level equipment
          Recipe                Recipe           resource definition.
          Phase
                       3.34 Lifecycle            ISA-95: Material Specification, Material
                                Phase            Requirement, Product Parameter, Process
                                                 Parameter
          Process      3.41 Process              The ISA-88 formula consists of Process
                                                 Inputs, Process Outputs and Process
                                                 Parameters. The Formula of an ISA-88
                                                 master recipe is equivalents to some of the
                                                 objects in the ISA-95 Product Definition
                                                 Information Model.
                                                 ISA-88 Process Input = ISA-95 Material
                                                 Specification (Material Consumed) in a
                                                 single process cell.
                                                 ISA-88 Process Output = ISA-95 Material
                                                 Specification (Material Produced) in a
                                                 single process cell.
                                                 ISA-88 Process Parameter = ISA-95
                                                 Product Parameter.
                                                 The same comparison may be made
                                                 between the formula within a control recipe
                                                 and the material and parameter objects
                                                 within an ISA-95 Production Schedule.

                                                 The meaning in both standards is
                                                 essentially the same.

                                                 ISA-88 defines a Phase as a procedural
                                                 element that is part of an Operation and
                                                 can call for or carry out a process oriented
                                                 task. This is different in meaning from the
                                                 use in ISA-95 where a Phase is a portion of
                                                 an entire lifecycle.

                                                 The terms are essentially the same

          control            control

          Shared use 3.54                       In ISA 88 the term refers to equipment that
                                                may be shared between two of more units
          Unit         3.63                     simultaneously. ISA-95 does not address
                                                this.
          supervision
                                                In ISA 88 the term refers specifically to the
                                                control activity that is specific to the
                                                grouping of equipment defined as a Unit.
                                                ISA-95 does not address this specific
                                                function.
Grouping     ISA-88     Ref ISA-95 Ref                                Comment
              Term
          Process      3.43 Production 6.8.1  Essentially identical functions.
          Manageme              Execution
          nt                    Managemen     In ISA 88 coordination control is a specific
                                t             and defined type of control that is required
          Coordinatio                         to allow procedural control to function
          n Control    4.5.1                  properly. In ISA-95, the term is used in its
                                              common and accepted definition.

NOTE: Terminology Table

     1. In the physical models, the ISA-88 hierarchy is presented with a batch focus; in ISA-95
          the scope includes batch, continuous, discrete and storage work centers.

     2. The ISA-95 activity model that is aligned with ISA-88 is the production activity model.
          The quality, maintenance and inventory models are not discussed here.
- 53 -  ISA-TR-88.95.01

Annex B - Recommended Changes to ISA88.00.01 and Related
                                      Documents

B.1 Change ISA-88.00.01 6.5.2 Manage process cell resources:

Both ISA-95 and ISA-88 contain functions called resource management. While they might look
like overlap, they are not. Resource management as described in ISA-95 is strategic and
sometimes tactical, but essentially always forward-looking. Resource management as described
in ISA-88 Process Cell Management is, in reality, resource tracking and execution related
allocation. Revising the language to emphasize that the two functions are, indeed, different and
complementary rather than overlapping will make the joint use of the two standards less
confusing. Specific recommended revision to ISA-88, Part 1, Section 6.5.2 is included below.
Refer to section 5.2 for further detail.

ISA-88.00.01, Section 6.5.2 - Track and allocate process cell resources

This is an execution related control function in which process cell resources are made available
for execution by allocating and reserving units and other equipment, by arbitrating multiple
requests for the same equipment, and by providing a mechanism for tracking unallocated
equipment. Process cell resources also include the materials within the process cell. Process
cell resource tracking and allocation must keep track of which materials are in the process cell,
which are pre-allocated by the batch schedule, the materials that are available for allocation
during recipe execution, the units that contain them, and their disposition.

An assignment of resources at the process cell or unit level (resource allocation) needs to be
provided in order for Process Cell Management to be able to assign the equipment or equipment
options according to active recipes being executed and the batch schedule. Although limited in
function to execution time allocations, limited equipment reassignment and generation of a new
resource allocation at the process cell or unit level may also be needed by an operator. This
new resource allocation may be necessary because of such variables as an execution-time
malfunction in equipment or availability of raw materials that could not be anticipated by
production planning and scheduling. Production Planning and Scheduling may require
notification of this new resource allocation to allow for assessment of impact.

The following capabilities are typically included in this control function:
     -- Obtaining scheduling information from Production Planning and Scheduling and
     providing this information to the manage batches control function
     -- Allocating or reserving equipment as requested by the manage batches control function.
     Within a process cell, batches may move from unit to unit. In each unit a portion of the
     control recipe, corresponding to the unit procedure, is executed. The control of what
     equipment to allocate to the different batches, and when transfers can take place may
     require control at the process cell level. Some examples of how this allocation may be done
     are

            a) according to a batch schedule designating each individual unit allocation; or
            b) according to a strategy defined at the process cell level combining the equipment
            requirements of the control recipe and the availability and capabilities of equipment at
            the time of execution.

     -- Arbitrating, as required, multiple requests for reservation or allocation of the same
     equipment during control recipe execution. The rules for arbitration may be simple or
     complex, depending on the application. Examples of arbitration rule sets include the
     following:

            a) Order of request (FIFO)
            b) Timed requests (such as by reserving the equipment)
            c) Priority of batch
            d) Maximizing equipment utilization (such as by minimizing cleaning requirements,
            minimizing energy consumption, or maximizing throughput)
            e) Operator judgment

     -- Keeping track of unallocated equipment within the process cell
     -- Receiving status information sent by Unit Supervision and/or status information sent by
     Process Control related to unallocated equipment within the process cell
     -- Updating information on all process cell resources to the collect batch and process cell
     information control function
     -- Updating Production Planning and Scheduling with batch progress information, such as

            a) batch ID;
            b) batch state change events;
            c) actual quantities of raw materials, products, and utilities;
            d) equipment assignments; and
            e) projected and actual allocation and de-allocation times of process cell resources.

B.2 Revise ISA-88, Part 1 to include specific categories of resources

ISA-95 defines specific categories of resources. ISA-88 does not specifically do so for personnel
or material.
ISA-88 should be revised to reflect the ISA-95 resources (equipment, personnel, material). Refer
to section 5.4 for further detail.
- 55 -  ISA-TR-88.95.01

Annex C- Recommended Changes to ANSI/ISA95.00.03 and
                              Related Documents

The ISA 88-95 working group has requested that the following issues be sent to the ISA95
committee with request for guidance

The working group asks ISA95 to modify Part 3 to state that production execution management
also includes activities in a process cell. The proposed new text is:
"The production execution management activities include the coordination of manual and
automated processes in a site, area or work center."
Developing and promulgating sound consensus standards, recommended practices, and
technical reports is one of ISA's primary goals. To achieve this goal the Standards and Practices
Department relies on the technical expertise and efforts of volunteer committee members,
chairmen and reviewers.

ISA is an American National Standards Institute (ANSI) accredited organization. ISA administers
United States Technical Advisory Groups (USTAGs) and provides secretariat support for
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) committees that develop process measurement and control standards. To
obtain additional information on the Society's standards program, please write:

          Attn: Standards Department
          67 Alexander Drive
          P.O. Box 12277
          Research Triangle Park, NC 27709

ISBN: 978-1-934394-78-6
